One set of polynomials used to describe these phenomena are the basis for the ENZ theory and are
orthogonal on the unit disk. In addition to the Zernike polynomials, one of these phenomena is called the
Petzval curvature. The sine theorem can be used to characterize another one of these in which point sources
appear to have a long tail. Seidel decomposed them into five different types, and the Schmidt plate is used
to correct one that occurs due to varying focal length across a spherical lens. Also coming in a chromatic
variety, FTP, name these effects which include tilt, astigmatism, and distortion, which leads to blurring of
images in imperfect lenses.
ANSWER: Aberrations
Higher-order examples of these entities are described by Zernike polynomials. Two finite transverse
ones can be calculated using the Aldis theorem. The magnitude of one of these entities is proportional to
one over the Abbe number. The five Seidel ones arise from a third-order approximation of the sine function
in Snell's Law and include a type caused by the inability of a lens to focus parallel light rays to a single
point, as well as astigmatism and coma. For 10 points, name these distortions in optical images caused by
limitations of lenses, types of which include chromatic and spherical.
ANSWER: optical aberrations
A group of mathematical constructs used to describe these phenomena is made simpler to use via Noll
ordering, and which act as a basis over a circular support. Schwarzschild's perturbation eikonal was
originally used to study these phenomena. The nisen bokeh effect occurs when overcorrecting for one
of these, which is least noticeable within the circle of least confusion. Third-order ones are described
by the Seidel coefficients, and in general they can be described using (*) Zernike polynomials. Two
versions of this phenomenon occur due to different wavelengths having different speeds and a device not
being parabolic; those versions are the "chromatic" and "spherical" varieties, the latter occurring because
rays do not cross at the focal point. For 10 points, name these optical phenomena in which images are
distorted.
ANSWER: optical aberration
The Strehl ratio gives the ratio of the Gaussian point with this phenomenon present to the point without it,
and, with additional terms, Zernike polynomials can be used to test for them. Tilt and piston are two types,
and another form may result from a low Abbe number or if the refractive index varies for different
wavelengths. One of the simpler cases may result if the shape of a lens is not consistent. For 10 points,
identify these phenomena, the deviations from a predicted image which can come in spherical or chromatic
varieties.
ANSWER: optical aberrations
The Strehl ratio of intensities is used when these things are present. The function for these things can
be expanded in terms of a complete set of polynomials orthogonal over the interior of the unit circle;
that set of polynomials is named for Zernike. One of these things is eliminated when the tangential
and sagittal surfaces lie on the Petzval surface. For a rotationally symmetric system, five of these
things, of third-order, are described by the Seidel coefficients. These things arise because the basic
trigonometric functions are truncated after one term in their Taylor series in the paraxial approximation,
which is not valid. Those third-order ones include coma and astigmatism. For 10 points, identify these
departures from ideal optics that come in spherical and chromatic types.
ANSWER: optical aberrations [or geometrical aberrations]
The principle of maximum work would apply exactly to this state, at which a reaction's change in Gibbs
free energy equals its change in enthalpy. At this state, a boson gas condenses into a single quantum state.
Superfluids and superconductors form when this physical state is approached, although scientists have only
gotten within one hundred picokelvins of reaching it. For 10 points, name this temperature at which matter
has no thermal energy, equal to zero Kelvin.
ANSWER: absolute zero [or 0 Kelvin until it is read]
Bose-Einstein condensates only exist close to this condition. The third law of thermodynamics states
that in this condition, a perfect crystal has no (*) entropy. Superfluidity and superconductivity exist
mainly near this condition, at which particles have minimal vibrational motion. For 10 points, name this
value equal to minus 273.15 degrees Celsius, the coldest possible temperature.
ANSWER: absolute zero (accept zero kelvins)
A "Fermi sea" of electrons occurs at this point due to the Pauli Exclusion Principle. A quantum
harmonic oscillator at it must have a "residual energy" of one-half h-bar times frequency, while
Nernst stated that the entropy of a system reaches a (*) fixed minimum as one approaches this point in
his Third Law of Thermodynamics. Getting close to it allows for the creation of superconductors and
Bose-Einstein condensates. For 10 points, identify this temperature that is equal to negative 459.67
degrees Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: absolute zero [or 0 Kelvin; prompt on -273.15 degrees Celsius; prompt on -459.67 degree Fahrenheit before mentioned]
The cosmic microwave background radiation exists slightly above this condition, as do both
lambda points for helium. Bose-Einstein condensates also exist at points near this condition. The
Third Law of Thermodynamics states that the entropy of a perfect crystal is (*) zero at this condition.
A simple way to determine the value for this condition is to graph the relationship between a gas's
temperature and its pressure, then extrapolate the line to where pressure equals zero. For 10 points, name
this temperature roughly equal to negative 273 degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: absolute zero
Potassium atoms were used to surpass this state in January 2013 in a study performed by
Schneider et al. using a quantum gas. Electrons pack together to form a "Fermi sea" at this state,
and Bose-Einstein condensates exist near this state. The (*) Third Law of thermodynamics considers the
entropy of a perfect crystal at this state, and this state has the same numerical value on the Rankine scale as
it does on the more classical scale used for it. For 10 points, identify this really cold state, which is zero on
the Kelvin scale.
ANSWER: absolute zero [or 0 Kelvin before "zero" is read; prompt on -273.15 Celsius or -459.67 Fahrenheit]
In general relativity, the equivalence principle states that this property is indistinguishable from a
gravitational field. The time derivative of this quantity is the jerk. For a mass moving in a circle, this
quantity will point towards the (*) center. It is expressed in units of length divided by time squared. In
Newton's Second Law, this quantity is equal to force divided by mass. For 10 points, name this vector ,
defined as rate of change in velocity.
ANSWER: acceleration [or gravity or word forms until "gravitational"]
Quintessence and phantom energy attempt to explain this phenomenon's cosmic occurrence. The power
radiated by a point charge is proportional to charge squared times this quantity squared, according to
Larmor's formula. Constant for free-falling objects in a vacuum, its angular form is equal to torque over
moment of inertia, and it is equal to force over mass, according to Newton's second law. Measured in units
of meters per second squared, it is the second derivative of position. Representing change in velocity, for 10
points, give this term commonly used to mean an increase in speed.
ANSWER: acceleration [accept cosmic acceleration or accelerating universe in first sentence]
Measurements of this quantity can involve a seismic mass on piezoelectric material or attached to
a spring. Two times angular velocity cross velocity equals the value of this quantity caused by the
Coriolis effect. Twice this quantity times displacement gives the change in the value of speed squared.
The quantity speed squared divided by radius equals the centripetal type of this quantity. If there is
no initial velocity, half of this quantity is multiplied by time squared to find displacement. Newton's
second law says that this quantity times mass gives the net force on an object. Name this quantity
equal to the change in velocity per unit time.
ANSWER: acceleration [accept longer answers and word forms]
A non-inertial reference frame is defined as doing this relative to an inertial one. When a particle goes
through this, it can create a form of radiation known as brehmsstrahlung. In circular motion, the vector for
this quantity is drawn towards the center. The change in this quantity is called jerk, and in Newton's
Second Law, it is equal to Force divided by mass. For 10 points, name this quantity, which can be found by
dividing velocity by time and is basically speeding up or slowing down.
ANSWER: acceleration [or deceleration]
The achievement of one form of this quantity is the subject of the injection problem, and an attempt
to account for one type of this quantity predicts a "big rip"; that is the phantom energy model for its
cosmic variety. In addition to the aforementioned type of this quantity named for Fermi, another
form of this quantity which is NOT force is named for Coriolis. Another form of it can be calculated
as the (*) velocity squared over the radius of curvature of a path. Its derivative with respect to time is jerk,
and it is the second derivative of position. For 10 points, identify this quantity which is the rate of change of
velocity.
ANSWER: acceleration [accept Fermi acceleration before mentioned; also be generous and accept cosmic acceleration early]
One form of this was used by Enrico Fermi to explain how a magnetic mirror creates cosmic rays and was
named for him. Two spaceships perform this action while connected by a string in a thought experiment
explained by length contraction, and this action explains the differences between the two people in the twin
paradox. This quantity equals angular velocity squared times radius in circular motion, which means it also
equals speed squared divided by radius. Give this quantity equal to the time derivative of velocity which
also equals net force over mass.
ANSWER: acceleration
An equation named for this quantity is found by multiplying both sides of the Friedmann equation by
the square of the scale factor, taking the derivative, and inserting the fluid equation, and this
quantity also sometimes names the second of the Friedmann equations. The derivative of this
quantity is multiplied by mu sub not times q squared over six pi c in the SI version of the Larmor
formula, which gives the force of the (*) radiation reaction. It's not mass, but equivalence principle states
that its gravitational and inertial forms are equal, and an instrument measuring this quantity will show a
value of zero in an inertial reference frame. This quantity's time derivative is the jerk, and when it is
multiplied by the mass it gives the force according to Newton's second law. For 10 points, give this
quantity, which is the change in velocity over time.
ANSWER: acceleration [prompt on "a"]
The second Friedmann equation is sometimes named for this quantity and relates it to density plus three
times the pressure. This quantity and charge are both squared in the numerator of the Larmor formula. A
type of this quantity named for Fermi is experienced by a particle trapped between two magnetic mirrors.
This quantity is the second derivative of position and the first derivative of velocity with respect to time.
For 10 points, name this quantity measured in meters per second squared that appears in Newton's second
law, and is equal to force divided by mass.
ANSWER: acceleration
The Fermi form of this quantity results from charged particles interacting with moving magnetic clouds,
while Bremsstrahlung (BREM-"straw"-"lung") radiation results from charged particles with nonzero values
for it. The tangential velocity squared divided by the radius yields its centripetal form. The square of the
final velocity equals the square of final velocity plus twice the product of distance and this quantity. It is
measured in meters per second squared. For 10 points, name this rate of change of velocity.
ANSWER: acceleration
The magnitude of one form of this quantity equals v squared over the radius for an object traveling
around a circle. This quantity is the integral over time of jerk and is zero for an inertial reference
frame. When multiplied by an object's mass it yields an object's force. This quantity can be found by
taking the second derivative of an object's position. For 10 points, name this quantity given by an object's
change in velocity divided by its time of travel.
ANSWER: acceleration (accept centripetal acceleration before "jerk" is read; prompt on "a")
In a rotating reference frame, the Coriolis version of this quantity is negative two times the cross
product of the angular velocity vector of the reference frame and the radial velocity. Torricelli's
equation includes a term of 2 times the net distance times this quantity. Its (*) centripetal form is equal
to the tangential velocity squared divided by the radius. It occurs to a mass when a force acts upon that
mass. For 10 points, name this rate of change of velocity.
ANSWER: acceleration
By the equivalence principle, a homogenous gravitational field is equivalent to this quantity. The time
derivative of this quantity is jerk. In the kinematic equation for position as a function of time, this quantity
is the coefficient of the time-squared term, because it is the second derivative of position. By Newton's
Second Law, it is equal to force over mass. For 10 points, name this quantity that is the "a" in "F equals m
a."
ANSWER: acceleration
When its masses are equal, this quantity is zero for an Atwood machine. For objects in a rotating
reference frame, it is negative two times the frame's angular velocity crossed with the object's
velocity. For a spring it is zero at zero displacement, and the square of the velocity of a body initially
at rest is equal to two times the displacement times this quantity. It is equal to velocity squared over
radius for uniform circular motion, and force is equal to the product of (*) mass and this quantity. For
10 points, name this quantity that is the rate of change of velocity.
ANSWER: acceleration
For a body in simple harmonic oscillation, this quantity equals negative the square of angular speed
times displacement. One form of this quantity equals velocity squared divided by the radius. It is the
second derivative of (*) position with respect to time, and by Newton's second law, is equal to net force
over mass. For 10 points, name this physical quantity, the rate of change of velocity, symbolized a.
ANSWER: (linear or translational) acceleration (prompt on a)
The terminal velocity of an object acted upon by a drag force is proportional to the square root of its
mass times this quantity, and a launched object has escape velocity equal to the square root of 2r
times this quantity. The maximum height a launched projectile reaches is inversely proportional to
this quantity, and the projectile's vertical velocity equals initial velocity minus this quantity times
time. This quantity is equal to (*) big-G times M over R-squared, and a certain type of potential energy
has magnitude mass times height times this quantity. For ten points, identify this quantity which on Earth is
about 9.8 meters per second-squared, often symbolized little-g.
ANSWER: acceleration due to gravity (accept any answer with both the underlined words or word forms; prompt any answer with one of them, accept little-g or lowercase-g before mention, prompt on just "G")
In two temperature plasmas, one regime seen in the formation of these is derived by ignoring some of
the electron-ion relaxation processes. Another model of their formation is based on magnetic fields
creating turbulence meaning that viscosity will scale with the alpha factor. These objects that are
subject to the Balbus-Hawley instability are described by advection dominated regimes and the (*)
Shakura-Sunyaev model. These power X-ray pulsars. The upper bound of their formation rate is given by
the Eddington limit. Angular momentum is transferred outwards in these. These objects are usually
accompanied by relativistic jets and all quasars and black holes are surrounded by these objects. For 10
points, name this flat grouping of matter that surrounds a gravitational source.
ANSWER: accretion disk
The Hilbert form of this quantity can be used to derive Einstein's field equations. The contribution of
a path has phase proportional to this quantity in Feynman's path-integral formulation. This quantity
appears as Hamilton's principal function in the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. By defining this quantity
as the integral of momentum with respect to the generalized position, the path of motion can be
found, though not as a function of time. Its variation is zero only if the (*) Lagrangian satisfies the
Euler-Lagrange equations. It is given by the integral of the Lagrangian with respect to time in Hamilton's
principle. For 10 points, name this quantity that, like time in Fermat's principle, is stationary for any
trajectory taken by a system according to its namesake principle.
ANSWER: action
This theorem states that if an eigenvalue is separated from the rest of the system's spectrum, a slow
perturbation on that system will keep the system in its original eigenstate; the probability that it does
not is given by the Lander-Zener formula. This term also refers to an (*) index denoted gamma, the
ratio of the constant-pressure heat capacity to the constant-volume one. This condition is expressed
mathematically by the formula P times V to the gamma is constant, and this type of cooling occurs when
rising through the atmosphere. For 10 points, identify this term, which also describes a process in which no
heat is gained or lost by a system.
ANSWER: adiabatic
One quantity that is described as this kind of invariant is the magnetic moment of a charged particle
as it gyrates around magnetic field lines; that invariant is an approximation to a Poincare invariant.
One theorem of this name gives conditions under which a Hamiltonian will acquire a measurable
geometric phase in a cyclic process. That theorem states that a Hamiltonian that is (*) perturbed in
this manner will evolve into an eigenstate of the perturbed Hamiltonian. Caratheodory's formulation of the
second law of thermodynamics describes states that are not accessible via paths with vanishing heat
differential. An "index" of this name is equal to one, plus two divided by the number of degrees of freedom
available to a molecule; that index is also the ratio of specific heats. For 10 points, give this term that
describes thermodynamic processes that occur without heat transfer.
ANSWER: adiabatic [accept isentropic; accept adiabatic invariant or adiabatic theorem or adiabatic process or adiabatic index]
Chapter 11 of this book contains a "table of chords", which uses base-60 numerals. Manuel
Comnenus gave a copy of this book to Henry Aristippus, though it was popularized via Gerard of
Cremona's Latin translation of an Arabic copy by Sahl ibn Bishr. This book is the only extant source for
the trigonometry of Hipparchus, and one section of this book defines deferents as paths traced out by the
center of an epicycle. Its first chapter discusses the theories of Aristotle. For ten points, name this book
which posits a geocentric universe, written by Ptolemy.
ANSWER: The Almagest
This letter, along with the chemical symbol of an element, is used in the name of a spectral line in the
Balmer series that dominates the visible spectrum. This letter represents a quantity approximately equal to
1/137, the fine structure constant, and it is frequently used to represent angular acceleration. A particle
which was used to discover the atomic nucleus is named for this letter. For 10 points, name this Greek letter
which names the helium nucleus, a particle made up two protons and two neutrons.
ANSWER: alpha
The formula for the energy release generated by this process contains a constant offset of 28.3 MeV [read:
mega-electron-volts]. In stars, beryllium-8 undergoes this process, providing the necessary ingredients for
the production of stellar carbon. Gamow's model of this process posited that the introduction of a Coulomb
potential to the nucleus raised the energy of a certain particle, allowing it to tunnel out, and explains the
exponential dependence of decay rate as a function of energy released. Unlike a weak decay mechanism,
this decay conserves both total atomic number and total atomic charge. A form of spontaneous fission, for
10 points, identify this decay mechanism whereby a heavy atom decays into a lighter one by emitting this
mechanism's namesake particle, a helium nucleus.
ANSWER: alpha decay [prompt on "triple alpha"]
The STAR Collaboration reported the observation of this particle's antiparticle, the most massive
antiparticle observed to date. George Gamow discovered the mechanism for the release of these particles
via quantum tunnelling. This particle and a neutron are produced by the fusion of triton and deuteron
particles. These particles followed a one over sine to the fourth scattering in an experiment in that detected
them using a zinc sulfide screen. That experiment was conducted by Geiger and Marsden and disproved the
plum-pudding model of the atom. For 10 points, name this particle used in Rutherford's gold foil
experiment, which is identical to a helium-4 nucleus.
ANSWER: alpha particle [accept helium nucleus until said]
Considering one of these particles as a particle-in-a-box allows you to derive the Geiger-Nuttall law, which
relates lambda to the energy of these particles. In stars, three of them react to form carbon in a process that
occurs at extreme temperatures and low hydrogen concentrations. The fact that some of these particles were
deflected when Marsden and Geiger shot them at a metal sheet was evidence for the existence of the atomic
nucleus. For 10 points, name these particles equivalent to helium nuclei, the largest particles produced
during radioactive decay.
ANSWER: alpha particles [or alpha radiation; or helium nucleus before read; prompt on helium]
These particles are emitted by radioactive static neutralizers as one of the final steps when producing paper.
Already used to treat bone cancers, research is being done to attach bismuth and actinium [ak-TIH-nee-um]
to sites near tumors to treat other cancers. These particles can cause lung cancer, most commonly doing so
after the inhalation of radium. These were aimed at gold foil when the atomic nucleus was discovered by
Ernest Rutherford. Name these particles equivalent to a helium nucleus.
ANSWER: alpha particles (or alpha radiation, prompt on "helium nucleus")
Making up about 10% of cosmic rays, these particles can only travel through a few centimeters of
air. One of these is produced alongside thorium in a transnucleation reaction. These particles were
deflected by "corpuscles" in an experiment that disproved the plum pudding theory, in which they
were fired at a thin sheet of (*) gold foil. Used by Rutherford in that experiment, they are produced from
a namesake form of decay of uranium. For 10 points, name these particles with a mass number of 4, which
are basically helium nuclei.
ANSWER: alpha particles [or helium nuclei before mention; or helium nucleus before mention; do not accept or prompt on "helium"]
Ionization smoke detectors rely on the ability of these entities to ionize oxygen and nitrogen. In a
nuclear fusion chain reaction, three of these entities combine to form an atom of carbon in a process that
forms a beryllium intermediate. Ernest Rutherford fired a beam of this particle to develop the idea of an
extremely small, dense nucleus in his gold foil experiment. Because of this particle's composition, it is
sometimes referred to as a helium nucleus, and uranium decays by emitting this particle. For 10 points,
name this particle which contains two protons and two neutrons.
ANSWER: alpha particle (accept helium nucleus before mentioned)
Litz wire can be used to reduce a form of resistance unique to this that arises from the skin effect. Induction
motors are the canonical example of this kind of motor, and the first one was bought by George
Westinghouse from Nikola Tesla. A complex quantity specific to it may be calculated by extension for
inductors and capacitors. In general, impedance is the analogue of resistance for this. For 10 points, identify
this form of current common in household appliances, which changes orientation back and forth over time,
often contrasted with direct current.
ANSWER: alternating current
At high frequencies, this type of flow can give rise to uneven distribution of charge away from the center of
the wire in the skin effect. The voltage equation for this type of flow is described by the relationship of the
peak voltage times the sine of the angular frequency times the time traveled. A transformer to increase the
voltage is usually required to transmit flow with this property, which can be converted using a rectifier. For
10 points, give the name of this type of flow in which an electric charge periodically reverses, commonly
referred to as AC.
ANSWER: alternating current [accept AC before mentioned; prompt on partial answer]
Lord Kelvin constructed numerous balance apparatuses named for this man, who invented the astatic
needle. One law named for this man describes the work done in moving a monopole around a closed
path, and another relating magnetic field strength to distance and electric current is a special case of the
Biot-Savart Law. A flow of one coulomb per second is equal to his namesake unit, which measures a
quantity often symbolized by a capital I. For 10 points, name this French physicist whose namesake unit
measures current.
ANSWER: Andre Marie Ampere
The differential form of the law named after this person finds the curl of a magnetic field. That law was
corrected by adding a term for the time derivative of the electric displacement field. It states that the line
integral of the magnetic H-field equals the surface integral of the free current density. The correction was
done by James Clerk Maxwell, who made this person's circuital law one of his four equations. Name this
Frenchman who became the namesake of the unit equivalent to a watt per volt or to a coulomb per second,
the standard unit of current.
ANSWER: Andre-Marie Ampere
When this law is applied to the second London equation, the result is a quantity that is the distance in which
the magnetic field of a superconductor becomes e times weaker; that is the London penetration depth. If the
appropriate symmetry exists in a circuit, then one can use this law in place of the Biot-Savart law. The
original formulation of this law only applied to time-independent currents; however, James Maxwell added
a term to this equation which corrected for time-varying electric fields, sometimes dubbed the
"displacement current." Identify this basic law of electromagnetism, which relates the line integral of the
magnetic field to the enclosed current times the permeability constant, named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Ampere's circuital law
This law's original form only applies to charge densities that do not vary with time. One method of
modifying it is to consider the vacuum and electric field between two plates of a capacitor. Maxwell
modified this law to include a term for displacement current. This law says that the line integral of B dot d l
is equal to mu times the enclosed current. For 10 points, name this law which gives the magnetic field of a
wire, named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Ampere's Law [or Ampere-Maxwell law]
The correct form of this law includes a term proportional to the time derivative of the electric flux,
known as the displacement current, that was added to this law by James Maxwell. The coefficient of
proportionality in this law is known as the permeability of free space. If the current density is not constant,
this law does not hold and must be replaced by the Biot-Savart (BEE-oh suh-VAR) Law. For 10 points,
name this equation that states that the path integral of the magnetic field is proportional to the current
enclosed by the path, which is the only one of Maxwell's Equations named after a French physicist.
ANSWER: Ampere's Law
The namesake of this law gives a model for magnetization in which all magnetism results from
namesake bound currents. This result implied that the divergence of current density vanished, even
in capacitors, until Maxwell added a term corresponding to displacement current to this equation.
This equation is a symmetric case of the more general (*) Biot-Savart law, and states that the line
integral of the magnetic field around a surface is equal to the current passing through the surface. For 10
point name this equation whose namesake also lends his name to the SI unit for current.
ANSWER: Ampere's Law [do not accept "amp's law"]
This law was modified by Maxwell for use in dynamic fields to include a displacement current term.
One constant of proportionality in this equation is the magnetic permeability of a vacuum,
symbolized mu-nought, which can be multiplied by number of turns per unit length and the current to
find the magnetic field of a solenoid. For 10 points, name this law, part of Maxwell's equations, that relates
the current flowing through a surface to the line integral of the magnetic field around the perimeter of the
surface.
ANSWER: Ampere's law
In combination with the London equation, this law can be used to find the penetration depth in the Meissner
effect. Its original form implied that the magnetic field was solenoidal. It can also be expressed as "the curl
of the H-field equals the conduction current", and for static fields, this law is equivalent to the Biot-Savart
law. Its original form was incompatible with capacitors, so Maxwell added a term of the time-derivative of
the E-field, the displacement current, to this equation. This law states that the free current is proportional to
the path integral of magnetic field with respect to displacement. Used to find the magnetic field produced by
a wire, name this one of Maxwell's equations, named for a French physicist.
ANSWER: Ampere's Circuit Law [or the Ampere-Maxwell Law]
Similar to Faraday's Law of Induction, this law's differential and integral forms can be related via the
Kelvin-Stokes theorem, and the displacement current should be taken into account for this law to be correct.
Easier to solve than but similar to the Biot-Savart Law, this law states that the line integral of the magnetic
field around a closed loop is equal to the permeability times the enclosed current. For 10 points, identify
this law, one of the Maxwell equations, named after its French discoverer who also lends his name to the
unit for current.
ANSWER: Ampere's Circuital Law
This law can be expressed in an integral or differential form, and can be shown to be equivalent by the
Kelvin-Stokes theorem. This law relates the magnetic field around a closed loop to the electric current in
the loop. One of the four laws in Maxwell's Equations, Maxwell added a displacement current term to this
law. For 10 points, name this law of classical electromagnetism named after its French discoverer.
ANSWER: Ampere's Circuital Law
One term in the mathematical expression of this law includes a partial derivative with respect to time of a
polarization, but in a vacuum, that term simplifies to the product of permittivity and the partial time
derivative of the electric field. The integral and differential forms of it can be related with the Kelvin-Stokes
theorem. It would not be affected by the existence of magnetic monopoles, unlike some other equations
named for the man who also added that displacement current term to this law, James Maxwell. For 10
points, name this law which states that the line integral of the magnetic field around a closed loop is equal to
the permeability times the enclosed current.
ANSWER: Ampere's Law or Ampere-Maxwell's law
Along with the mass and energy conservation laws and the generalized Ohm's law, this law is used to
derive the Sweet-Parker reconnection model in plasmas. Applying this equation to one of the London
equations and taking the curl gives an equation involving the London penetration depth, which is the
depth a magnetic field penetrates into a superconductor. Applying the divergence to both sides of this
equation gives the (*) continuity equation. Applying this equation to a closed path in the plane through the
middle of a charging capacitor gives a nonzero result, requiring the displacement current. Like the Biot-
Savart law, it can be used to find the magnetic field, but unlike the Biot-Savart law it considers current
enclosed in closed loop. For 10 points, name this member of the Maxwell equations.
ANSWER: Ampere's law [accept Ampere's circuital law; accept Maxwell-Ampere equation]
This law's integral and differential forms can be related by the Kelvin-Stokes Theorem. The original
formulation of this law broke the rule that the divergence of a curl must be zero; that flaw was corrected
with the addition of a displacement current by James Maxwell. In cases with the requisite symmetry, this
law is used in place of the more cumbersome Biot-Savart (BEE-oh suh-VAR) Law. For 10 points, name this
law that states that the line integral of the magnetic field around a closed loop is proportional to the current
passing through it.
ANSWER: Ampere's Law
The general equation for it features a quantity equal to the product of the permittivity constant,
permeability constant, and the time derivative of the E-field, which vanishes in the absence of time-varying
E-fields. That quantity was introduced in On Physical Lines of Force by James Maxwell, and is called the
displacement current. For 10 points, identify this law which states that the magnetic field in a closed loop
produced by a current is proportion to the current enclosed in the loop, and is named for a French scientist.
ANSWER: Ampere's Law
The definition of the magnetic vector potential proceeds from this law. When a time-varying electric
field is present, this law must be modified to include a term for displacement current. That modification
was first done by James Maxwell, and its differential form involves the curl of the magnetic field. This law
is a special case of the Biot-Savart law that is easier to apply to a problem given certain symmetries. This
law states that the line integral of the magnetic field around a closed curve is equal to the current enclosed.
For 10 points, identify this law whose namesake also names the SI unit for electric current.
ANSWER: Ampere's law
Combining this law with the London equation gives the London penetration depth. The integral and
differential forms of this law and another named for an Englishman can be related by the Kelvin-Stokes
theorem. This law is derivable from the Biot-Savart [BEE-oh-suh-VAHR] law, and its differential form
states the curl of the magnetic field equals the current density. James Maxwell added the displacement
current to this law, which is one of Maxwell's equations. For 10 points, name this law that can be used to
find the magnetic field caused by a current.
ANSWER: Ampere's (circuital) law
For a wavefunction, the square of the "probability" form of this quantity is the probability of observing a
given quantum state. The RMS value for a sinusoidal function equals this value over the square root of two.
It's not frequency, but radio waves can be transmitted by modulating this quantity. For the wave equation,
this quantity multiplies the outside of the trigonometric function. This quantity equals the distance between
crest and trough over two. For 10 points, name this quantity, the "height" of a wave.
ANSWER: amplitude
The double-sideband large-carrier version of this technique has the advantage of being relatively
simple to implement in hardware, at the expense of low power efficiency and wasted bandwidth.
Signals transmitted with this technique can theoretically be recovered perfectly using coherent
detection, though envelope detection is often used instead due to its simplicity and lower cost. For 10
points, name this technique for transmitting information in which the carrier signal's strength is varied in
proportion to the magnitude of the message signals, usually between 540 to 1610 kHz in North American
radio, often contrasted with changes in frequency.
ANSWER: amplitude modulation
NGC 206 is the brightest area in this object, whose largest globular cluster is known as Mayal II or
Globular One. Ernst Hartwig observed the only supernova originating from here in 1885, and it appears to
have a double nucleus and at least 14 satellites, including M110 and M32. Originally called the "little
cloud" by al Sufi, it is found in its namesake constellation, which is itself near the Pegasus constellation.
Edwin Hubble used Cepheid variables to show definitively that it was not part of the Milky Way. For 10
points, name this astronomical object, number 31 in Messier's catalogue, the nearest large spiral galaxy to
the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda Galaxy [accept M31 before it's read]
By studying this location, Walter Baade was able to define Population I and Population II stars. Baade was
specifically studying the two dense star clusters at the center of this place, which is located next to
Triangulum. Ernst Hartwig observed the only supernova to occur in this place, which was discovered in the
900s CE by the Persian astronomer Abd al-Rahman. Listed as number thirty-one in the Messier catalogue, it
is expected to collide with the Milky Way in about 2.5 billion years. For 10 points, name this Local Group
galaxy, the closest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda galaxy [accept Messier 31 before "thirty-one" is read]
This object has a z-value of -.001, indicating that it is moving towards the earth, and Tod Lauer
discovered that it contains two nuclei, P1, and P2, the latter of which is a black hole. It was first
discovered by Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi, and Earnst Hartwig is the only person to observe a (*)
supernova in this object. This object was determined to be an independent when Edwin Hubble discovered
the first Cepheid variable within it. The brightest and largest member of the Local Group, this entity is the
31st entry in the Messier Catalog. For ten points, name this closest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda Galaxy
Its presence was first recorded by Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in 964 CE, and this object is classified as a
SA(s)b type under the de Vacouleurs-Sandage extended classification system. It is believed to have been
formed when a metal-rich halo captured its first protogalatic fragments. Known to harbor two dense
compact star clusters at its center, the dimmer one is believed to contain a supermassive black hole.
Approaching our galaxy at about 300 kilometers per second, a collision with it is predicted to occur in about
2.5 billion years. For 10 points, name this spiral galaxy, the largest in the Local Group and the nearest to
our own, named after a Greek mythological princess.
ANSWER: Andromeda Galaxy [also accept M31 or Messier 31]
Walter Baade found a second type of Cepheid variable stars in its globular cluster because they are much
fainter than ones in this object's Population I regions. SN 1885, the first supernova to be discovered outside
the Milky Way was discovered here by Ernst Hartwig, and the brightest globular cluster in the local group,
Globular One, is located in it. Simon Marius, the first to observe it through a telescope, described it as a
"candle shining through horn." It shares its name with a constellation whose alpha star is Alpheratz. Called
M31 in the Messier Catalog, for 10 points, identify this large spiral galaxy closest to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda
One part of this object, HR 465, shows unusual spectral levels of promethium. The Triangulum may
be a satellite of this object, and the Ernst Hartwig-observed SN1885A is the only supernova ever to
take place here. Le Gentil M32 and Mayall II, the brightest globular cluster in the Local Group,
orbit this object. Simon Marius was the first to observe it telescopically, and in discovering this
object, Azophi described it as [*] a "small cloud." It is speculated that this object may one day collide and
merge with the Milky Way. For 10 points, name this largest galaxy in the Local Group, designated M31 and
the nearest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda galaxy [accept "M31" before mentioned; accept "NGC 224"]
This entity contains the brightest globular cluster in the local group, known as Mayall II, and
appears to have a double nucleus. Its interactions with neighboring galaxies such as the Triangulum
appear to have warped its disk. It is the largest member of the (*) Local Group, and is predicted to
collide with the Milky Way in 3 to 5 billion years. M31 is the Messier classification of, for 10 points, what
closest spiral galaxy to us?
ANSWER: Andromeda or M31 before mention or NGC 224
This body is the location of the globular cluster known as Mayall II and was also the source of a
supernova observed by Ernst Hartwig in 1885. Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi first recorded its presence in
his Book of Fixed Stars, describing it as a "small cloud", while Messier catalogued it as (*) M31.
Hubble discovered the first Cepheid variables in this region which has an apparent double nucleus. This
member of the Local Group is approximately 250,000 light years across and is expected to collide with the
Milky Way in several billion years. For 10 points, name this closest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda Galaxy [accept M31 or Messier 31 before mentioned; accept NGC 224]
The Mayal II globular cluster is located in this object, which has an x-ray emitting cloud of gas at its center
that depletes material for the formation of new stars. This object has a double nucleus and contains a dust
ring in the middle that is the remnants of a dwarf galaxy. This type Sb object is one of the few blue-shifted
objects of its kind. Trails of dust are evidence of this object consuming its neighbors that include NGC221
and NGC205. This member of the Local Group has a thick disc of old stars and is surrounded by HVCs.
This object is M31 in the Messier Catalogue. For 10 points, name this galaxy, the closest spiral galaxy to
the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda Galaxy [accept Andromeda Nebula; accept M31 until mentioned]
This object once crashed into the Maffei I group, ejecting the latter from its group. Companions to this
object include the Pegasus and Cassiopeia dwarves. The bright globular cluster G1, also known as Mayall
II, is in this object. In 1991, this object was discovered to have a double nucleus. This object's apparent
neighbor, the Triangulum galaxy, may be gravitationally bound to it. Edwin Hubble discovered the first
Cepheid variable in this galaxy, proving that it was not a star cluster in the Milky Way. Named for and
contained in a constellation including Sirrah, for 10 points, name this large member of the Local Group, the
nearest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda galaxy [accept M31]
The earliest recorded observation of this was by Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi, who described it as a "small cloud"
in his Book of Fixed Stars. The only supernova to have been recorded here was in 1885 and was observed
by Ernst Hartwig. Simon Marius was the first to observe this through a telescope, and William Herschel
noted a fairly reddish hue in its core. In 1764, Charles Messier cataloged this as object M31. Approximately
2.5 million light years away, this largest object of the Local Group is on a collision course with the Milky
Way. For 10 points, identify this nearest spiral galaxy to our own.
ANSWER: Andromeda Galaxy [accept Messier 31 before mentioned]
A supernova in 1885 is the only one reported in this object; however, it was mistakenly referred to as a nova
because it was perceived to be much closer than it actually is. Although its angular diameter is greater than
that of the moon, it is only visible to the naked eye as a small haze. Because it is moving closer to the sun, it
is one of the few objects of its type that exhibits a blueshift. It was first cataloged by Charles Messier and
designated as M31. FTP, name this galaxy, which in three billion years will collide with our own and is the
closest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda Galaxy (Accept M31 before it is mentioned, prompt on Andromeda, do not accept Andromeda Nebula)
The European Space Agency will be launching a spacecraft called the Gaea Project in 2011 to
calculate transverse velocities in order to study this phenomenon. Frank Summer integrated data
gathered from observing "the Mice" with IRAC analysis of a certain "dust ring" to chart it, mapping
out the formation of long, filamentous structures known as (*) tidal tails. One hypothesis predicts that
disk interaction will be minimal during this event, and focuses on the likely interaction of dark matter halos.
Slated to occur in three billion years- time, FTP, identify this cosmic event in which the two largest Local
Group galaxies will smash into each other, possibly creating a new entity with the horribly-chosen name of
"Milkomeda."
ANSWER: Andromeda-Milky Way Collision (or anything involving those two galaxies interacting/crashing/etc) [prompt on 'galactic collisions']
A "magic" one of these measures reduces the effect of nuclear spin interactions in NMR
spectroscopy. An Ewald ("YOU"-uhld) sphere shows the relationship between wavelength, distance,
the unit cell, and this measure of the diffracted X-rays. The value of the reflection coefficient for
p-polarized light is (*) zero at one of these measures. Snell's law relates phase velocity to the sines of two
of these measures. For 10 points, name these measures, examples of which include a critical one,
Brewster's one, and ones "of incidence."
ANSWER: angles [or magic angles before "cross-section"; or measure of the angle or synonyms]
For certain special cases, this quantity is proportional to the cross product of a particles position r
with the gradient operator. For an electron, this quantity is determined by its azimuthal quantum
number. In quantum mechanics, values of this quantity are equal to whole number multiples of the
reduced Planck's constant. The time derivative of this quantity is torque, and this quantity can be
defined as the product of the moment of inertia with angular velocity or the cross product of position with
mass times velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity associated with rotational motion whose conservation
forms the basis of Kepler's second law.
ANSWER: angular momentum (do not accept "momentum")
A basis formed from the eigenstates of this operator is the subject of the Wigner-Eckhart theorem.
The eigenvalues of this operator along a selected axis is equal to  ("h-bar") times the magnetic
quantum number. The commutator of two orthonormal operators describing this quantity is equal to
minus i times  ("h-bar") times the third. This quantity can be summed quantum-mechanically using
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. Pulsars and other rapidly rotating bodies demonstrate the conservation of this
rotational quantity, the time derivative of torque. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the product of
moment of inertia and angular velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum
The magnitude of one form of this vector is equal to h-bar times the square root of the product of
the orbital quantum number and that quantum number plus one. The time derivative of this quantity
is (*) torque. It equals the moment of inertia times the angular velocity. It can be found by taking the
cross-product of the radius and the linear momentum. For 10 points, name this quantity from mechanics
denoted L, which is the rotational analog of linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [prompt on L before it is read; do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
For an electron, the square of this value is equal to h bar squared times the quantum number
associated with this quantity times one plus that quantum number. According to the no-hair
theorem, a black hole can be completely characterized by mass, charge, and this quantity. This
quantity times angular velocity divided by two will give the (*) rotational kinetic energy. It is equal to
angular velocity times moment of inertia. For 10 points, name this rotational counterpart of momentum
denoted by a capital L.
ANSWER: angular momentum [accept L before mentioned; accept rotational momentum before mentioned; do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
In quantum mechanics, one can apply Noether's (Nuh-thur-s) theorem associated with rotational
invariance to show that this property is conserved, assuming the Lagrangian has rotational
symmetry. Other forms of this property are known as orbital operators and spin operators, and
occur quantized n multiples of the reduced Planck's constant. It gives rise to gyroscopic precession,
which additionally depends on the body's moment of inertia and torque, which are related quantities to it. It
is defined by a cross product between the position vector, and a vector representing its translational
equivalent, equal to mass times linear velocity. For ten points, name this physical property of rotating
bodies, which helps explain why figure skaters spin faster when their arms are tucked in.
ANSWER: Angular Momentum (do not accept momentum)
In quantum mechanics, the cross product of this quantity and p yields the Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector, and
expanding this quantity in an uncoupled basis requires Clebsch-Gordon coefficients. The rotational
symmetry of the Lagrangian and Noether's theorem imply this quantity's conservation, and Kepler's Second
Law is a consequence of the conservation of this. Planck's constant has the same units as this quantity, and
this quantity's time derivative is torque. For ten points, name this quantity symbolized L, equal to the cross
product of position and linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum (Do not accept linear momentum.)
A model of this quantity relies on setting up a correspondence between a "plus-type" and "minustype" 
harmonic oscillator and calculating the eigenket. Chew and Frautschi showed that this
quantity is equal to a constant times the squared-mass, with the constant identical between Regge
trajectories. For a high-symmetry crystal, this quantity is decreased by the loss of symmetry in a
given atom's potential well in a process called quenching. The subscript of a term symbol is equal to
this quantity for a given energy level. The three operators for this quantity cyclically anticommute,
and its operator is equal to (*) negative i h-bar times r cross del. Noether's theorem states that the
rotational symmetry of a system leads to the conservation of this quantity; that conservation explains why a
skater spins faster when pulling their arms in. For 10 points, name this quantity, which in classical
mechanics is equal to the product of angular velocity and the moment of inertia.
ANSWER: angular momentum [prompt on L; prompt on J; do not accept or prompt on just "momentum"]
The quantum coupling of this quantity is described using Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. If a system's
Lagrangian is rotationally invariant, this quantity is conserved due to Noether's Theorem. For
atomic orbitals, this quantity, represented as the azimuthal quantum number, must be an integer
multiple of h bar, and its intrinsic form was quantized in the Stern-Gerlach experiment and is called
[*] spin. Both Kepler's Second Law and gyroscopes demonstrate the conservation of this quantity in the
absence of net external torque. For 10 points, name this cross product of position and linear momentum,
symbolized with L.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
The cosmic censorship hypothesis sets an upper limit on this quantity for a black hole of a given mass. A
quantity similar to this one is crossed with this quantity in the first term of the Laplace-Runge-Lenz
vector. Black holes with zero value for this quantity are described by the Einstein field equation solution
named for Reissner and Nordstrom. Kepler's second law is a result of the conservation of this quantity.
For a particle in a circular orbit, this quantity equals "mass times radius times velocity", and the time
derivative of this quantity is torque. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the product of moment of
inertia and angular velocity, whose linear analogue equals mass times velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum [or moment of momentum; or rotational momentum; prompt on "L"; prompt on "J"; do not accept or prompt on "momentum", "linear momentum" or "p"]
The commutator of the x and y operators associated with this quantity is i h-bar times the z operator
associated with this quantity. This quantity is quantized in units of h-bar, and its conservation leads to an
orbiting body increasing its velocity when closer to the body it is orbiting, the result seen in Kepler's second
law. The time derivative of this quantity is torque, and this quantity is conserved when there is no external
torque acting on the system. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized L, which is equal to the product
of moment of inertia and angular frequency and serves as the rotational analog of linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [prompt on L or just momentum]
Attempts to measure two orthogonal components of this quantity are restricted by Heisenberg's Uncertainty
Principle, and different aspects of this quantity interact in j-j coupling. When the derivative of this quantity
is taken with respect to time, there are originally two terms, but one of them turns out to equal mass times
velocity crossed with velocity, which is zero. The nonzero term of this quantity's time derivative equals
displacement crossed with force, which is torque, and this quantity itself is often defined as moment of
inertia times angular speed. Name this quantity which is always conserved.
ANSWER: angular momentum
For an electron in a hydrogen atom, spin-orbit coupling creates a "total" form of this quantity
symbolized J. This quantity can be calculated as the square root of the product of two consecutive
integers, times h-bar. The shape of an atomic orbital is given by this quantity's namesake quantum
number. An important property of this quantity was used to show that equal areas are swept out in
equal times according to Kepler's (*) Second Law. For an object travelling in uniform circular motion,
this quantity equals mass times velocity times radius. The time derivative of it is torque. For ten points,
name this conserved quantity equal to its "linear" form cross radius, symbolized L.
ANSWER: angular momentum (or L before mention; do not accept or prompt on "linear momentum" or even just "momentum")
In the Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector, this quantity is crossed with linear momentum. J-coupling of this
quantity can be used to determine dihedral angles in a form of spectroscopy which can only be used on
nuclides with a nonzero value of this quantity. The quantum numbers "m sub L" and "m sub S" correspond
to the orbital and spin types of this quantity. Classically, this vector is the time integral of torque and for
rigid bodies, it is the product of the moment of inertia and angular velocity. For 10 points, name this
quantity, which equals the cross product of position with linear momentum, often symbolized "L".
ANSWER: angular momentum [accept spin angular momentum; accept orbital angular momentum; prompt on "spin" before it is read; do not accept "momentum" or "linear momentum"]
This value is quantized so that it must equal an integer times the reduced Planck constant. Its components
do not commute, so they are complementary variables in Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. Its derivative
with respect to time, which can be found using the product rule, gives one term equal to zero and the other
equal to torque. This conserved quantity equals moment of inertia times angular velocity. Name this
quantity equal to the cross product of position with linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum (do not accept "momentum")
The Wigner D-matrix satisfies a number of differential properties if space-fixed operators of this
quantity are introduced and the summation of this quantity can be governed by using ClebschGordon coefficients. 
In quantum mechanics, the spherical harmonics are eigenfunctions of this
quantity and they obey a commutation relation equal to I times h-bar times this quantity in the
mutually (*) orthogonal direction. The time derivative of this quantity is equal to torque and its
conservation is demonstrated in Kepler's Second Law. Planck's constant has the dimensions of, FTP, what
conserved quantity symbolized L and defined as the cross product of a position vector and linear
momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum (do not prompt on "momentum," prompt on "spin" before "quantum mechanics")
The Wigner-Eckart theorem describes operators based on eigenstates of this quantity, and the LaplaceRunge-
Lenz vector is calculated as the cross product of linear momentum and this quantity. Kepler's second
law is derived from the fact that this quantity is conserved, which can be derived from the principle of
rotational invariance. The time derivative of this quantity is equal to torque, and this quantity is equal to a
body's moment of inertia times angular velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized "L," the
rotational analog of linear momentum.
ANSWER: Angular Momentum [accept "L" until mention; do not accept or prompt on "Momentum"]
For an object, this quantity is the sum over all the particles of the mass times the velocity times the
distance from the center of mass. Gyroscopes function due to a change in this quantity when they tilt,
and it is the derivative with respect to time of torque. The fact that planets spend equal amounts of
time at each point in their orbit around the sun is a consequence of the conservation of this quantity. For 10
points, name this quantity that is equal to the product of moment of inertia and angular velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum
Sommerfeld proposed that for an electron, both the magnitude and the direction of this vector were
quantized. When coupling this quantity over multiple systems, the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are often
used. Conservation of this quantity can be derived from the principle of rotational invariance. This
derivative of torque with respect to time is equal to the product of the moment of inertia and the
angular velocity. For 10 points, name this property of a rotating object, equal to the cross-product of the
radius and a similar concept, linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "linear momentum" or "momentum"]
If the operator representing this quantity is exponentiated, the resulting operator can be represented using
the Wigner D-functions. The commutation relations of the x, y, and z components of this quantity's quantum
mechanical operator form a representation of the Lie algebra of the group SO(3), and the commutators of
those components are proportional to the Levi-Cevita symbol. The eigenfunctions of this operator are the
(*) spherical harmonics, and Kepler's Second Law is a statement of the conservation of this quantity. FTP,
identify this quantity equal to the cross product of position and linear momentum, which is conserved unless
acted upon by an external torque.
ANSWER: Angular momentum (accept spin before asterisk)
This quantity's namesake operator is negative i h bar times r cross the gradient. Coefficients symbolized the
bra j-one m-one j-two m-two times the ket J M are used when this quantity is coupled. The time derivative
of this quantity is torque, and it is conserved when there is no external torque. For a particle in a circular
orbit, this quantity is equal to the product of mass, velocity, and radius. Symbolized with a capital L, this
quantity is also equal to the product of the moment of inertia and angular velocity. For 10 points, name this
rotational form of momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do NOT accept "(linear) momentum"]
The gyromagnetic ratio of an electron is equal to the magnetic moment divided by this quantity. Its
operator is equal to negative i h bar times r cross the gradient. The quantum number j corresponds to the
total value of this. Its conservation is a consequence of the isotropy of space. Its derivative with respect to
time is torque and Kepler's second law follows from it being conserved. It is equal to the product of
moment of inertia and angular velocity. For 10 points, name this rotational version of momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum
The ladder operators on the spherical harmonics can be constructed from the operators for this quantity's
components. Those components do not commute with each other, but do commute with this quantity's
square. The subscript in a term symbol gives the total amount of this quantity. The effective potential is
equal to a term proportional to this quantity squared plus potential energy. Kepler's second law is
equivalent to the conservation of this quantity. In quantum physics, this quantity's intrinsic type is known
as spin. The time derivative of this quantity is torque. For 10 points, name this quantity often calculated as
"r cross p," a conserved quantity that measures an object's rotation.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
Niels Bohr proposed stationary orbits and the quantization of this quantity in order to formulate his
model of the atom, showing that it is an integer multiple of h-bar. Kinetic energy equals this quantity
squared divided by twice the moment of inertia. The shape of an atomic orbital is given by this quantity's
namesake quantum number. Kepler's Second Law results from the conservation of this quantity. It equals
the product of mass, velocity, and radius for an object in uniform circular motion, and time derivative of it
is torque. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized L.
ANSWER: angular momentum [or L before mention]
In quantum mechanics, the square of this quantity is equal to h-bar squared times n times
quantity n plus one, and the g-factor gives the ratio of the magnetic moment to this quantity. One
form of Kepler's Second Law states that this quantity divided by 2 m is equal to the rate of sweeping
out area. In the Bohr model, this quantity for the electron is equal to the principal quantum number
times h-bar. The vector of this quantity traces out a circle in (*) precession, and the time derivative of
this quantity is equal to the torque. The conservation of this quantity explains why a skater spins faster
when pulling their arms in. For 10 points, name this physical quantity equal to the product of the moment
of inertia and the angular velocity and symbolized L.
ANSWER: angular momentum [accept L before mention; prompt on "momentum"; do not accept "linear momentum"]
In orbital mechanics, the radial position of a body is proportional to the square of this quantity. If
a system's Lagrangian is rotationally symmetric, Noether's theorem predicts the conservation of this
quantity, which leads to Kepler's Second Law. Conserved in (*) torque-free systems, this quantity is
equal to the radius vector crosses with the velocity vector times mass. Equal to the moment of inertia times
angular velocity is, for 10 points, what rotational analogue of momentum?
ANSWER: orbital angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
Torque can cause this quantity to change in a phenomenon called precession (pre-SESH-un). This
quantity also results in the rapid spin of a neutron star as it shrinks. The increase of a skater's speed as he
pulls in his arms is a consequence of the conservation of this quantity, as is the second of Kepler's laws of
planetary motion. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the product of moment of inertia and angular
velocity, the rotational analogue of the quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum [prompt on momentum; do not accept "linear momentum"]
The operator for this quantity is equal to negative i times h-bar times quantity r cross grad. This quantity
is equal to the time derivative of the torque. Kepler's equal area law can be derived from the conservation
of this quantity, which is also responsible for the fact that a skater spins faster when they pull their arms in.
This quantity is equal to the moment of inertia times the angular velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity
symbolized L, which is a rotational analogue the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum [prompt on momentum; do not accept "linear momentum"]
In one field, this quantity is defined as a two-zero valent tensor in asymptotically flat space-time, while in
another, its operators are proportional to representations of infinitesimal elements of the group SU two. For
black holes, the magnitude of this value must be less than the square of the hole's mass in geometric units.
One component of this quantity for a hydrogen atom is given by the magnetic quantum number multiplied
by the unit of quantization, h-bar. For 10 points, name this quantity whose time derivative is torque, which
is given in classical mechanics by the cross product of position and momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum
Julian Schwinger developed a scheme in which these operators can be determined in terms of the operators
of two uncoupled harmonic oscillators for a spin one half particle. The Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are
used when adding these quantities, and the commutators of its orbital operators are proportional to the Levi-
Civita symbol, while its eigenvalues are proportional to h-bar. Noether's Theorem derives the conservation
of this quantity from invariance under rotation, and Kepler's Second Law is a consequence of the
conservation of this. In general, it is conserved in the absence of external torques. This is, FTP what
physical quantity, often symbolized L, that equals the cross product of position and momentum?
ANSWER: angular momentum; do not accept or prompt on "momentum"
Schwinger worked out a model of this operator by considering it as two uncoupled harmonic
oscillators and showed that combinations of them satisfy the same commutation relations as this
quantity. One theorem states that matrix elements of tensor operators in eigenstates of the operator
of this quantity can be written as a coefficient term times a term independent of this quantity; that is
the Wigner-Eckart (*) theorem. The isotropy of space guarantees conservation of this quantity, and this
quantity is the generator of rotations. Spherical harmonics are eigenstates of the operator of this quantity
which is time integral of torque. For 10 points, name this quantity given by angular frequency times the
moment of inertia, one type of which is spin.
ANSWER: angular momentum (accept L; accept J; do not accept or prompt on "momentum" or "linear momentum")
This quantum mechanical operator arises out of a solution to the spherical harmonics, and its
eigenvalues are equal to h bar squared times its namesake quantum number times that number plus
one. For a rotating body, kinetic energy is equal to its square over twice the moment of inertia. For 10
points, identify this vector quantity that is given by the radius from the axis of rotation times mass times
velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
In quantum mechanics, Clebsch-Gordon coefficients are used when states of this quantity are added. This
quantity squared equals h-bar times the azimuthal quantum number times azimuthal quantum number plus
one in quantum mechanics. Precession occurs with a change in the direction of this vector quantity, and
Kepler's second law is derived by keeping this quantity constant. This quantity's time derivative is torque,
and the spin of a particle is an intrinsic type of this quantity, which is given by the moment of inertia times
the angular velocity. For 10 points, identify this quantity for a rotational system, symbolized "L," which is
always conserved.
ANSWER: angular momentum [accept spin before "azimuthal"; prompt on momentum; do not accept "linear momentum"]
The square of this quantity's operator is the Casimir invariant of the SO(3) Lie Algebra, and this quantity is
crossed to p in the definition of the Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector. Yrast refers to a minimum of energy for a
given value of this quantity, which is often added using expansion coefficients named for Clebsch and
Gordan. Often specified using term symbols, two types of it are coupled in heavy atoms by JJ-coupling or in
lighter ones by Russell-Saunders coupling. It is the Noether charge associated with rotational invariance,
and this quantity's derivative with respect to time is equal to the net torque. For ten points, identify this
quantity which comes in orbital and spin types and is equal to moment of inertia times angular velocity.
ANSWER: Angular momentum or L
Noether's theorem relates this quantity to rotational symmetry. The no-hair theorem states that
black holes can be characterized entirely by their mass, their charge, and their value of this quantity,
which leads to (*) Kepler's second law because it is conserved if there is no net external torque. For 10
points, name this vector quantity equal to the cross product of position and an object's mass times its
velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum (accept rotational momentum or moment of momentum; do not accept or prompt on "momentum")
The total value of this property for an atom can be obtained by using Russell-Sanders coupling to
combine contributions from orbital and spin components. A deficiency in this quantity during beta
decay led Wolfgang Pauli to hypothesize the neutrino. Its conservation by (*) Noether's theorem is the
basis of Kepler's second law of planetary motion, and torque is the time derivative of this quantity
according to Newton's second law. For 10 points, name this vector quantity, defined as the product of
the moment of inertia and the angular velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum [prompt on momentum]
In light atoms, the spin and orbital types of this quantity are coupled by Russell-Saunders coupling.
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are used in the addition of this quantity. According to Noether's [NUH-ters]
theorem, this quantity is conserved in rotationally invariant systems. The time derivative of this quantity is
equal to torque. For 10 points, name this quantity that is symbolized L and is the rotational analogue of
linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
When two states of this quantity are coupled, Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are used. In the Bohr
model, this quantity is given in multiples of h-bar. Kepler's Second Law is a consequence of it being
held constant. Spin is a special type of this quantity whose time-derivative is (*) torque. Equal to the
product of the moment of inertia and angular velocity, it is symbolized capital L. For 10 points, name this
conserved rotational quantity that is the cross-product of position and its linear analogue.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum" by itself or "linear momentum"]
An attempt to find the eigenkets for this quantity for a combined system such that the kets conform to a
constant of the motion led to the discovery of the Clebsch-Gordon coefficients. This quantity is equal to
integer multiples of the reduced Planck's constant in the Bohr model, in which it is quantized. This quantity
is equal to the cross product of the radius vector and the velocity vector times mass, which is why ice
skaters rotate faster when they pull in their arms. The time derivative of this quantity is equal to torque and
it is symbolized with an L. For 10 points, name this rotational analog of momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum
Immanuel Kant and Pierre-Simon Laplace had trouble explaining why this quantity was so low for
the sun relative to the planets. This value and energy are both quantized in the Bohr atomic model.
When an object absorbs light, this quantity changes by the amount of energy absorbed divided by
the light's angular frequency. This quantity is measured in units of force multiplied by distance
multiplied by time, and its derivative with respect to time is torque. The intrinsic form of this value
is called spin. Name this conserved quantity equal to moment of inertia times angular velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
In relativistic quantum mechanics, the additional contribution to this quantity of spin is given by the Pauli-
Lubanski pseudovector. "Coupling" eigenstates for this quantity in total from separate eigenstates requires
use of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. This quantity's conservation gives rise to Kepler's third law of
planetary motion. For a rotating body, this quantity is equal to the product of angular velocity and moment
of inertia. For 10 points, name this quantity, symbolized L, the rotational analogue of linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [accept moment of momentum or rotational momentum; prompt on L before mention; do not accept or prompt on "linear momentum"]
This quantity's interactions are described by the Russell-Saunders coupling scheme. In quantum mechanics,
its expansion in uncoupled bases requires Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. One result about this quantity
follows from the directional symmetry of space, according to Noether's theorem. A consequence of that
result is the fact that a line drawn from a planet to the sun sweeps out equal areas in equal times. Defined as
the cross product of the position vector and its linear analogue, this quantity is conserved in the absence of
an external torque. For 10 points, name this rotational quantity, the product of moment of inertia and
angular velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum [prompt on "L"; do not accept "momentum"]
Different values of this quantity for a nucleus at minimal energy is used to find the Yrast. When
coupling of this quantity occurs, Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are produced. One property of this
gives rise to Kepler's Second Law, also known as the law of equal areas, and that same property of
this quantity about the z axis is explained in Noether's Theorem. One definition of this quantity is the
product of the moment of inertia with the angular velocity, while it is also equal to r cross p. It explains
why a spinning gyroscope does not fall over. For 10 points each, identify this conserved quantity, often
symbolized L.
ANSWER: Angular Momentum
The quantum mechanical operator corresponding to this classical mechanics quantity is denoted j,
and the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are used when systems with two different values for this
quantity are coupled. Kepler's Second Law is derived from the conservation of this quantity, which is
the time derivative of (*) torque and thus equal to the product of the moment of inertia and angular
velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity denoted L, which is equal to the cross product of the radius and
linear momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [do not accept or prompt on "momentum"]
Spherical harmonics are eigenstates of this quantity, and the no hair theorem says that black holes
only have mass, charge, and this quantity. The s, p, d, and f orbitals have values 0, 1, 2, and 3 for this
quantity, respectively, and the quantum number for this quantity is always (*) less than the principal
quantum number. The time derivative of this quantity is torque. This is equal to moment of inertia times
angular velocity, and spin is an "intrinsic" form of this quantity. For 10 points, name this rotational
analogue of momentum.
ANSWER: orbital angular momentum (prompt on "spin"; do not accept "momentum")
The spherical harmonics have eigenvalue h-bar2 l (l + 1) under this operator's square. The
commutator for operators representing two components of this quantity is plus or minus i h-bar times
the operator for its third component. Slater determinants are used to force fermion wavefunctions to
be asymmetric as required by one type of this quantity. Hyperfine structure results from one interaction
involving this quantity, as does Russell-Saunders coupling and the splitting of signals in NMR. Expanding
this quantity in the uncoupled basis requires Clebsch-Gordon coefficients. For 10 points, name this quantity
equal to the product of inertial moment and angular velocity.
ANSWER: angular momentum
The decomposition of spherical tensor operators acting on the eigenbasis of this operator is the usual
application of the Wigner-Eckart theorem. Like spin, the commutator of two distinct components of
this operator is given by plus or minus i h-bar times the third component. When transforming
between coupled and uncoupled bases for this operator, the (*) Clebsch-Gordan coefficients arise. A
component of this quantity is given by the derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to angle of rotation
about the corresponding axis. Thus this quantity is conserved in rotationally-invariant systems with no
external torque. For 10 points, name this quantity given by displacement cross momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [or orbital angular momentum; prompt on momentum, but do not accept "linear momentum"]
One of this quantity's operators is a 3x3 matrix with a 1 in the top left, a -1 in the bottom right, and
0s everywhere else. The operators corresponding to the three Cartesian vector components of this
quantity do not commute with each other, but they all commute with the operator corresponding to
this quantity squared. The eigenfunctions of this quantity's operators are the spherical harmonics.
The conservation of this quantity causes the radius vector for the (*) orbit of a planet to sweep out
equal areas in equal time, a fact known as Kepler's 2nd Law. This quantity is equal to the product of
moment of inertia with angular velocity, and it is conserved in the absence of an external torque. For 10
points, name this quantity symbolized L which is defined as the cross product of position with linear
momentum.
ANSWER: angular momentum [or rotational momentum, DO NOT accept or prompt "linear momentum" or just "momentum"]
For a particle, the orbital form of this quantity is defined by its azimuthal quantum number. The
conservation of this property is related to the rotational symmetry of space. Defined as the Gibbs vector
product of an object's position and linear momentum vectors, this quantity is also equivalent to the cross
product of an object's moment of inertia and its angular velocity. Kepler's second law of planetary motion is
a direct consequence of this property's conservation in a physical system. FTP, what is this quantity that
describes an objects' rotational movement with units of radians per second?
ANSWER: angular momentum
This quantity is equal to the principal quantum number times Planck's constant over 2 times pi and
the coupling of this quantity is used to correct for orbital resonance. The Kerr metric describes black
holes for which this quantity is nonzero, and for a particle in circular orbit, the magnitude of this
quantity is equal to (*) mvr. This property explains how a gyroscope can remain upright while spinning,
and the time derivative of this quantity is torque. For ten points, name this vector quantity, denoted L, the
product of moment of inertia and angular velocity, the rotational analogue of a quantity equal to mass times
velocity.
ANSWER: Angular momentum
This process produces a 511 kilo-electronvolt peak on gamma spectroscopy readouts. The
ANTARES detector attempts to find occurrences of this process between WIMPs. An operator
named for this process has eigenstates that are coherent states, and is symbolized a; that operator is
derived while solving the quantum harmonic oscillator and is also known as the lowering operator.
One instance of this process produces a pair of (*) photons totaling 1.022 mega-electron-volts moving in
opposite directions. The reverse of this process occurring near a black hole is used as an explanation for
Hawking radiation; that reverse of this process is called pair production. For 10 points, name this process
that occurs when a particle and its anti-particle collide.
ANSWER: annihilation
One variety of these objects has a geometry such that its performance characteristics repeat as the logarithm
of the frequency; that log-perdiodic type has planar and tooth-wedge subtypes. An array of these objects
produces a maximally narrow beam if the phase shift equals the product of wave vector and separation plus
pi over the number of objects, according to the Hansen-Woodyard condition. A simple example of one of
these objects is the dipole, while a linear array of such dipoles results in the Yagi-Uda type of them. The
maximum power gain for these objects equals radiation efficiency times directivity; the power they emit or
absorb is usually depicted by radiation patterns indicating the main and side lobes. For 10 points, name
these devices which transmit and receive electromagnetic signals.
ANSWER: antennas [the plural "antennae" is not found in the engineering literature]
This property, when combined with a set of behaviors including pseudogap phenomena, spectral weight
transfer, and T-linear resistivity, produces Mott insulators. Spin-polarized STM uses tips made from
materials with this property, which occurs in manganese-nickel and manganese-platinum alloys. Triangular
lattices of interactions with this property results in geometrical frustration, according to a model where this
property exists if all of the interaction terms Jij [J-sub-i-j] are negative. At room temperature, chromium is
the only pure element with this property, but it becomes paramagnetic above its 308K Neel temperature. For
10 points, name this property among two described by the Ising model, a magnetic state that exists when
neighboring spins point in opposite directions.
ANSWER: antiferromagnetism [do not accept or prompt on "ferromagnetism"]
Along with 'mottness- the order of this property is necessary to describe a Mott insulator and
materials with this property have an energy function that is the product of consecutive spins under
the Ising model. An effect known as exchange bias occurs when the 'hard- behavior from this
property causes a shift in the (*) 'soft- behavior of materials with a similar property. Materials that exhibit
it include metals such as chromium as well as manganese oxide. Reverting to paramagnetism above the
Neel Point, this is, FTP, which property resulting from a pattern of alternating or spiraling alignments of
magnetic moments in a material, the opposite of a certain form of magnetism displayed in iron?
ANSWER: antiferromagnetism
For a uniaxial crystal with this property, Kittel showed that when the wave number of collective excitations
goes to zero, the energy converges to a finite number proportional to the square root of the anisotropy
constant; thus, these materials exhibit a namesake resonance frequency. The frequency of spin waves in
materials with this property is linearly proportional to wave number and such spin waves exhibit two
independent polarization directions. In materials with this property the magnetic susceptibility as a function
of temperature has a well-defined maximum, at which point that graph has a kink. This property arises when
the sum of the mean magnetic moment densities in a sub-lattice is zero, but the difference is non-zero. For
ten points, identify these materials in which the magnetic moments in a unit cell cancel each other out, and
which become paramagnetic above the Neel point.
ANSWER: antiferromagnetic materials [accept word forms]
This substance was first synthesized by using the LEAR apparatus to launch particles at xenon
clusters. The ALPHA project uses minimum-B traps to contain this substance. One can analyze the
1S-2S transitions in this substance's absorption spectrum to confirm the CPT theorem. One method
of synthesizing this substance involved collecting radioactive sodium in a Penning trap in the ATRAP
and ATHENA experiments. The fact that this substance is (*) rare in the universe is the subject of the
baryon asymmetry problem. When one atom of this substance collides with a hydrogen atom, it forms two
gamma rays and two pions in an annihilation reaction. For 10 points, name this atom which consists of a
single positron orbiting an antiproton, the lightest element of antimatter.
ANSWER: antihydrogen [or h-bar; accept antimatter until "orbiting", prompt after]
The ATRAP project collected one type of this substance from radioactive sodium-22 in a Penning
trap. The existence of another type of this substance was proposed by Dirac to explain quantum
states with negative energies and was first observed by Carl Anderson. Because the Sakharov
conditions were satisfied, CP-symmetry violation explains why there is less of this substance
produced than its (*) counterpart. This substance produces high-energy gamma rays when it comes into
contact with normal particles, which have the same mass but opposite charge as particles of this type. The
positron is an example of, for ten points, what type of material which rapidly annihilates with matter?
ANSWER: antimatter (accept antiparticles; prompt on positrons and antihydrogen and other specific antiparticles)
Leonard Schiff and Myron Good argued these entities would violate the Eotvos experiment and CPT
symmetry. The hydrogen varieties of these entities have been experimented with by ATRAP, ATHENA,
and ALPHA. The 1959 Nobel Physics Prize was awarded to Owen Chamberlain and Emilio Segre for using
the Bevatron to discover a variety of these entities. Paul Dirac hypothesized the hole theory to explain these
particles. Positrons are an example of, for 10 points, this class of particles which undergo annihilation when
combined with their regular counterparts due to having equal mass but opposite charges.
ANSWER: antiparticles [or antimatter]
The first theory of these particles explained them as the holes in the distribution of the sea of
negative-energy particles predicted by the Dirac equation. In Feynman diagrams, these particles
move backwards in time, while their relative rarity in the universe is thought to be related to CP
symmetry violation. These particles were first observed in 1932 by Carl Anderson, while they can be
captured in (*) Penning traps. Each one carrying the same mass and opposite charge as the particle with
which it annihilates, for 10 points, name these subatomic particles, examples of which include the positron
and antiproton.
ANSWER: antiparticles [accept antimatter; accept positron before mentioned]
Myron Good argued that because there is insufficient CP violation in anomalous kaon regeneration,
this material was not affected by gravity. The first example of it was discovered by Carl Anderson in
observations of cosmic rays, and the ATHENA and ATRAP projects are attempting to isolate this
material. It was predicted by Dirac, who dubbed it a "hole" of negative energy. For 10 points, name this
material that undergoes annihilation when combined with regular matter.
ANSWER: antimatter [prompt on antiparticle]
Sphalerons may affect the production of this substance, which is also subject to the three Sakharov
conditions. Emilio Segre and Owen Chamberlain discovered several types of this substance in the Bevatron.
Thunderstorms producing this substance create terrestrial gamma-ray ashes, and the PAMELA module has
found this substance in Earth's Van Allen belts, where NASA has proposed extracting it. Neutral kaons may
turn into this substance in a process called mixing, while mesons contain one quark of this type. An
asymmetry regarding this substance results in the existence of the known universe. For ten points, name this
substance that annihilates upon contact with matter.
ANSWER: antimatter (accept matter before the end of the second sentence; accept baryons or antileptons before Sakharov")
An attempt to explain the relative lack of this in the universe is known as the Sakharov conditions
for baryogenesis. Neutral kaons mixing via the weak interaction allows kaons to oscillate into this.
The existence of this was implied by the Dirac equation and it is one of the products of pair production.
Examples which correspond to fermions have opposite spin and charge. For 10 points, name this material
which has some properties which undergoes annihilation when in contact with matter, an example of which
is a positron.
ANSWER: antimatter [or antiparticles]
A homogeneous magnetic field and inhomogeneous electric field can be used to store this substance if it is
charged. Andrei Sakharov proposed B violation to explain why this substance was less prevalent. This
material is represented by a bar, indicating that it has undergone charge conjugation. The Dirac equation
predicts this substance as holes in a Dirac sea, and along with its counterpart, this substance is produced in
beta decay. A remnant of pair production, this substance interacts with its more common counterpart
through annihilation. For 10 points, name this material consisting of particles like the positron, the opposite
of matter.
ANSWER: antimatter [or antiparticles; anti-prompt for less specificity on "positron"]
A mathematical property named for this person requires the absence of infinitesimals, and his namesake
spiral is described in polar coordinates by r equals a plus b theta. His On the Equilibrium of Planes
describes his discovery that floating objects orient themselves to have the lowest possible center of mass,
and he estimated the number of grains of sand that will fit inside the universe in The Sand Reckoner. This
person also invented a way of continuously lifting large amounts of water, his namesake screw, and he also
claimed that he could move the Earth given a place to stand and a lever. Name this ancient scientist whose
principle states that a body immersed in a fluid experiences a buoyant force equal to the weight of the fluid
it displaces.
ANSWER: Archimedes of Syracuse
The first stellar stream discovered contained this namesake star and is the remains of a dwarf galaxy
destroyed by the Milky Way. This class K star forms a vertex of the Great Diamond and it can be used to
determine the location of another vertex star, Spica. The light of this orange-red giant takes 37 years to
reach earth and was famously collected to turn on a series of switches, opening the 1933 Chicago World
Fair. It follows Ursa Major around the celestial pole and thus it is called the "Bear Watcher". For 10 points,
name this fourth brightest star of the night sky and the brightest of the northern Hemisphere, the alpha star
of the constellation Bootes.
ANSWER: Arcturus [accept alpha Bootes until mention]
One of its discoveries was that the Asteroid 216 Kleopatra was shaped like a dog-bone. More notably, it
was used to discover that the rotational rate of Mercury was 59 days rather than 88 days as previously
believed. Measurements of pulsar B1257+12 using it led to the discovery of the first extrasolar planets,
while Hulse and Taylor's Nobel prize was based on the discovery of the first binary pulsar with this
instrument. In the mid-90's a Gregorian reflector was installed, while in 1974, it transmitted its namesake
message towards M13. Operated by Cornell University, it is the source of the data used by SETI@home.
First used in 1963, for 10 points, name this largest radio telescope in the world, whose immobile reflector is
located near its namesake Puerto Rican city.
ANSWER: Arecibo Observatory (or Arecibo Radio Telescope)
D.T. Britt's database of the densities of these objects shows that their densities converge around the
traditional estimate of two grams per cubic centimeter. These objects are subject to the Tholen spectral
classification, which was supplemented by the 2002 SMASS classification. Both of those spectral
classifications break them down into three main types, C-Group, S-Group, and X-Group. Prominent
absences of these objects are found at the four-to-one, three-to-one, and five-to-two orbital resonances of a
certain body. These objects are not present in Kirkwood Gaps, and the ones found at Jupiter's Lagrange
points are called the "Trojans." For 10 points, name these objects in space that are found in a namesake
"belt" between Mars and Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroids
Max Wolf discovered 248 of these objects by himself. The malfunctioning Hayabusa project studied one of
these called Itokawa. These are categorized by their spectra, most falling under three main types; C-, M-,
and S-types. The Titius-Bode law predicted the location of one of these objects at 2.8AU from the Sun. The
Trojan types of these do not collide with larger celestial bodies because they can be found orbiting in one of
two Lagrangian points of stability. Kirkwood gaps are found in a group of these, and astrographs were used
to find these until 1998. Identify these minor planets which are not comets, the largest of which is Ceres.
ANSWER: asteroids
One effect posited to explain the motion of these objects is the generation of an effective force by
anisotropic emission of thermal photons named for Yarkovsky. These objects are the subject of the
Tholen and SMASS classification systems, in the latter of which X is the classification of the usual
metal types of these. One of these objects with an abnormally low eccentricity and no companions is
279 (*) Thule. Yesterday, the Dawn mission aimed at studying these bodies entered the region with the
highest density of these objects, which are absent in the Kirkwood gaps. Toutatis is part of the Atens class
of these objects, one of three subsets classified as NEOs, while groups of these bodies collected around
Jupiter's Lagrange points are known as Trojans. FTP, name this type of astronomic body that includes
Ceres, many of which are found in a namesake "belt" between Mars and Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroids
They are divided into taxonomic classes C, S, and M based on spectral reflectance and albedo. Their three
largest families are Eos, Koronis, and Themis. NEAR Shoemaker was the first spacecraft to orbit one of
these objects and their existence at points in the solution to the circular, restricted three-body problem was
predicted by Lagrange. Mean-motion resonances of Jupiter's orbital period produce depletions in these
objects called Kirkwood gaps and ones named after Patroclus, Hector, and Achilles and are known as the
Trojans. For 10 points, what are these astronomical objects such as Ceres and Vesta that are primarily
located in a belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter?
ANSWER: asteroids [or minor planets; or planetoids; accept meteorites before "Eos" is read]
Some of these objects are found in low quantities at areas of three-to-one, five-to-two, seven-to-three, and
two-to-one orbital resonance with a certain planet. The Trojans, objects of this type, are located in Jupiter's
Lagrange points with the sun. Bode's Law correctly predicted the orbit of the largest one of these objects.
The brightest of them, an object that can be seen from Earth with the naked eye, is Vesta. For 10 points,
name these celestial objects, many of which are found in their namesake "belt" between the orbits of Mars
and Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroids
Some of these objects are found in low quantities at areas of three-to-one, five-to-two, seven-to-three, and
twoto-one orbital resonance with a certain planet. The Trojans, objects of this type, are located in Jupiter's
Lagrange points with the sun. Bode's Law correctly predicted the orbit of the largest one of these objects.
The brightest of them, an object that can be seen from Earth with the naked eye, is Vesta. For 10 points,
name these celestial objects, many of which are found in their namesake "belt" between the orbits of Mars
and Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroids
The one named Kleopatra is shaped like a dog-bone. The first moon discovered to orbit one was Dactyl,
and Eros was the first near-Earth type to be discovered. The hypothetical vulcanoid ones could be found
inside the orbit of Mercury, and Achilles is a member of the Trojan group of them. NASA's Dawn Mission
is set to visit the only one bright enough to be seen with the naked eye, Vesta. The distribution of their
orbits is modified by the Kirkwood Gaps, which are located between Mars and Jupiter in their namesake
belt, which is home to Ceres. For 10 points, name these irregularly-shaped fragments of rock that are larger
than meteoroids but smaller than planets.
ANSWER: Asteroids [accept Planetoids; or Minor planets]
Heinrich Olbers discovered two large examples of these objects. In 1801, Gauss developed new
regression techniques for tracking one. The problematic Hayabusa project returned a sample from
one of them. Giuseppe Piazzi discovered the largest one. A particular one was visited by the NEAR
mission. One of these is the smallest (*) dwarf planet. A collision with one of these created the Chicxulub
crater. For 10 points, name these large rocks in space, one of which impacted the Yucatan Peninsula 65
million years ago.
ANSWER: asteroid
Several Kirkwood gaps are found with this group of celestial objects. Kiyotsugu Hirayama noted
similarities in this group of objects, and families such as the Themis and Gefion are defined, with Flora
being the largest family of these objects. Most members are carbonaceous, silicate, or metallic, and the rare
V-type objects were once thought to be from 4 Vesta, the second largest of these objects, which along with
Hygiea, Pallas, and Ceres, contain over half the mass of this region. For 10 points, identify this region of the
Solar System between Mars and Jupiter occupied by small rocky and icy objects.
ANSWER: the asteroid belt or the main (asteroid) belt
A classification system for this region was developed by Hirayama, while one of the most prominent
components of this region probably spawned Diogenites and Eucrites, two HED meteorites. The Griquas,
located here, are characterized by an unusually slow and eccentric orbit, much like another component of
this region, the Alindas. Some prominent features in this region arise due to orbital resonances such as 2:1
and 7:2 with a nearby object. The recently launched Dawn spacecraft will be landing on its two most
massive objects, including the V-type object, Vesta. The largest object in this body was discovered in 1801
by Giuseppe Piazzi and is known as Ceres. Also containing the Near Earth objects and Kirkwood Gaps, for
10 points, name this area of the solar system between Mars and Jupiter.
ANSWER: Asteroid Belt
The creation of Rheasilvia on one object in this region may be the origin of HED bodies, and
objects in this region can be classified by the Tholen and SMASS systems. 944 Hidalgo is often
considered part of this region, though its orbit extends outward to Saturn. Resonance effects cause
(*) Kirkwood gaps to form in this region. For 10 points, identify this tregion of the solar system that hosts
small rocky bodies such as Vesta and Ceres and is located between Jupiter and Mars.
ANSWER: main asteroid belt [or main asteroid belt]
This region was first theorized by a deviation in the Titius-Bode law. Its largest member was
discovered by Giuseppe Piazza; other large members of this region include Vesta and Pallas. Located
closer to the sun than the similar Trojan objects, members of this region possess jumps in their
orbital resonances known as Kirkwood gaps. Stretching from 2.1 to about 3.3 astronomical units from the
sun, the largest member of this region is Ceres. For 10 points, name this region of rocky objects found
between Mars and Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroid belt
Bodies in this structure are classified as C-type, S-type, and M-type based on composition.
Objects in this region are perturbed by thermal photons in the Yarkovsky effect. The outer edges of
this region contain D-type objects, which according to the Nice model were captured during the late
heavy bombardment. Objects in this region are sorted into Hirayama families based on clumps in a
proper inclination vs eccentricity plot. The frost line is found within this region, which contains a
series of features created by (*) 4:1 and 5:2 resonances with a nearby massive body; those are Kirkwood
gaps. This region contains Vesta, Ceres, and Pallas. For 10 points, name this region between the orbits of
Mars and Jupiter, which is filled with space rocks.
ANSWER: main asteroid belt [prompt on "asteroid" or "asteroid field"]
A group of astronomers called the Celestial Police studied this entity intensely in the 1800s. The NASA
spacecraft DAWN that was launched in 2007 was sent to study this entity, and orbital resonance with a
nearby body is the cause of the Kirkwood gaps in it. Motivated by the now-discredited Titius-Bode Law,
Giuseppe Piazzi found what is now the only dwarf planet that is not a trans-Neptunian object in this region.
The three largest objects located here are named Pallas, Vesta, and Ceres. For 10 points, identify this region
of the solar system, roughly between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
ANSWER: Asteroid Belt
Hantaro Nagaoka proposed a model of this structure based on Saturn's rings. A static, cubical model
of this structure was introduced by G.N. Lewis. An early twentieth-century model of this structure satisfied
the Rydberg formula and used quantized radii. Another model of this structure had corpuscles randomly
arranged in a positively-charged sea, was formulated by J.J. Thomson, and was named for a plum pudding.
The current model of this structure includes wavefunctions called orbitals. For ten points, name this basic
unit of matter.
ANSWER: atoms
Optical frequency combs are used to improve the accuracy of these devices. Norman Ramsey
proposed using a second microwave pulse to cancel out Doppler shifts in a precursor to these devices
designed by Harold Lyons that placed ammonia molecules in a waveguide absorption cell. These
devices were placed aboard airliners in the Hafele-Keating experiment, which was a test of (*) special
relativity. Modern examples of these devices typically use cold Cesium-133 or Rubidium-87, and they
work by exploiting the frequency of transition between states of atoms. The US Naval Observatory has an
ensemble of these devices, which are required for GPS satellites and NTP servers. For 10 points, name
these extremely accurate timekeepers.
ANSWER: atomic clocks [prompt on "clock" or similar answers implying timekeeping]
One variety of this object uses magnetic fields to separate particles according to their spin energies-the
beam variety, which is contrasted with the fountain kind. These objects, conceived by Isidor Rabi, were
used to test the theory of special relativity in the Hafele-Keating experiment, in which they were flown
around the world in airplanes in opposite directions to measure time dilation. The principal one for the US
is located in Boulder at NIST, and provides synchronization capabilities integral to the operation of GPS.
Often based on alkali metals like rubidium or cesium, name these objects that measure the frequency of
quantum energy level transitions to keep time.
ANSWER: atomic clocks [accept modifiers of "beam" or "fountain" before both have been mentioned]
Gryzinski and Nagaoka are postulators of these; the latter of which is known as the Saturnian. One
of these is based off of Abegg's rules and concludes that Coulomb's law does not hold for small
distances. One of these failed to explain the Zeeman effect and was modified by Sommerfield. One
named after the discoverer of the electron is also known as plum pudding, while another was tested by
Geiger and Marsden. The modern one is a probabilistic Schrodinger one while the Bohr-Rutherford one is
more simplistic. For ten points, these are models of what system consisting of negatively charged particles
orbiting a positively charged nucleus first discussed by Democritus.
ANSWER: Atomic Model or equivalents
Broadening of these things resulting from the Heisenberg uncertainty principle gives rise to a Lorentzian
distribution. These things can also be broadened by the Doppler effect due to random thermal motion.
Fraunhofer names a set of them first observed in the Sun. Using a prism, they can be observed in a flame
test. For hydrogen, their wavelength can be calculated using the Rydberg formula and can be grouped into
series like the Balmer. For 10 points, name these atomic fingerprints, discrete wavelengths observed in
excited atoms.
ANSWER: atomic spectral lines [or emission lines; or absorption lines]
The swinging variety is only integrable when the stationary element is three times as massive; otherwise, the
motion it exhibits is chaotic. In the simplest case, the acceleration of the system is equal to g times the
difference of the masses over the sum of the masses; similarly, the tension in the string connecting the two
masses is equal to g times twice the product of the masses over their sum. Invented by its namesake to prove
Newton's laws, this is, FTP, what simple apparatus that consists of two or more masses connected by a
massless string on frictionless pulleys?
ANSWER: Atwood's machine
A potential used to model these structures consists of spherical sections with intervening flat regions;
that potential is used in the KKR method. A method for calculating these structures is the k-dot-p
perturbation theory. Anderson's rule and the Schottky-Mott rule are used to determine the
"bending" of these entities in heterostructures. Calculating the crystal momentum at the edge of one
of these entities determines whether the space between them is direct or (*) indirect. In metals, the
Fermi level bisects one of these structures. In semiconductors, the lowest unfilled one of these entities lies
immediately above the valence one, and the space between the valence and conduction one is known as
their namesake "gap". For 10 points, name these ranges of energies that can be occupied by electrons in a
solid-state system.
ANSWER: electronic bands
Quantum dots have the unusual property that changing their size alters this property, which is why their
emitted wavelength is tunable. The increase of one in size with temperature change T is given by T squared
times a constant alpha divided by T plus a constant beta according to Varshni's theorem. Chemically
distorting a one-dimensional crystal can create additional ones in the Peierels distortion. This structure is
the solid-state equivalent of the space between the LUMO and the HOMO. Materials that have an indirect
one must emit a phonon during recombination, in which an electron moves from the top of it to the bottom.
The Fermi level exists in the middle of it in doped materials. For 10 points, name this region which is
prominent in insulators - a region forbidden to electrons, lying between the valence and conduction bands,
the size of which determines many characteristics of semiconductors.
ANSWER: the band gap region
This quantity can be made non-zero by lattice distortion due to a chemical reaction, the classic
example of which is the spacing-doubling oxidation of the one-dimensional crystal bipotassium
platinate cyanide. Such a chemical perturbation that creates one of these is known as a Peierls
distortion and corresponds to an upward shift on a Brillouin diagram so that the lower horizon
intersects above the Fermi wavenumber. This solid analogue to the (*) LUMO-HOMO difference
measures the width of a region forbidden to electrons in energy space and whose lower bound is the Fermi
energy. This quantity is on the order of the kinetic temperature for semi-conductors. It. For 10 points, name
this quantity that is essentially zero for conductors; the minimum amount of energy required to promote a
valence electron to a conduction state.
ANSWER: the band gap energy [prompt on resistivity or resistance before "LUMO-HOMO difference"]
This quantity at a temperature T can be found by subtracting alpha T squared over T plus beta from this
quantity at absolute zero. This quantity is indirect when it requires a phonon-assisted transition due to
energy maxima and minima not occurring at the same crystal momentum. Doping introduces new allowed
states at fractional values of this quantity. At absolute zero, the Fermi level is half the value of this quantity.
The wavelength of light absorbed or emitted by semiconductors can be calculated by using this quantity in
Planck's relation. For 10 points, name this quantity that is the required energy to excite a carrier from the
valence band to the conduction band.
ANSWER: band gap [prompt on energy gap; prompt on forbidden energy band]
The omega minus one of these particles was predicted by Murray Gell-Mann. A strangeness
number is added to this class of particles, which is equal to negative one times the number of strange
quarks included in one of these particles, and they are organized via the (*) Eightfold Way. These
particles are made of up of three quarks. For 10 points, identify this class of particles, which includes the
protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: baryons
The effective potential in this theory includes a term known as the "vector correction", which is logarithmic
in in the ratio of the frequency to the Debye frequency. This theory uses three Green's correlation functions
whose poles give the excitation energy, and much of the experimental corroboration for this theory came
from electron tunneling experiments conducted by Ivar Giaever. In this theory, an attractive potential exists
within a Debye energy of the Fermi surface and this theory's successes include the explanation of the
isotope effect and the prediction of the energy gap in the excitation spectrum after transition. For 10 points,
identify this theory in which the interaction of phonons with electron pairs results in superconductivity,
named for its three formulators.
ANSWER: Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory
Early experimental evidence for this theory included the reduction of heat capacity in vanadium, and
the discovery of the isotope effect in mercury. These findings confirmed one of this theory's central
tenets that certain entities interacted with the crystal lattice via phonon exchange. It correctly
predicts an energy gap near the Fermi level, and it can explain the expulsion of magnetic fields
known as the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name this theory that posits electrons condensing into Cooper
pairs, a theory of type I superconductors named for its three discoverers.
ANSWER: BCS theory
An extension of this theory that can account for strong coupling is named for Migdal and Eliashberg.
This theory recapitulates the Matthias rules, which predict that cubic systems are best for displaying
this theory's described phenomenon. One prediction of this theory is that the energy gap at T equals
zero is around 3.5. One success of this theory was its ability to predict the effect of the isotope of the
material on the (*) transition temperature, and this theory states that phonons mediate the coupling of
electrons at very low temperatures. This theory also explains the expulsion of magnetic fields in the
Meissner effect. For 10 points, name this theory which states that electrons combine into Cooper pairs
within a superconductor, named for three people.
ANSWER: BCS theory [or Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory, any order is fine but you need all 3]
This facility's first president was Frank Jewett, and a precursor to this facility was developed after its
founder won the Volta Prize. At this location, the discovery that electrons behave like a wave was made by
Davisson and Germer, and Penzias and Wilson found the cosmic microwave background. This facility,
which was spun off into Lucent Technologies after being owned by AT&T, developed the transistor, solar
cell, and gas laser. For ten points, name this facility located in Murray Hill, New Jersey, named for the
inventor of the telephone.
ANSWER: Bell Laboratories
A quantum cascade laser was developed here, as was WaveLan, the first wireless local area network.
The Fractional Quantum Hall Effect was discovered at this institution, where the Inferno operating system,
using the Limbo programming language, was developed here by Dennis Ritchie. Ritchie's earlier work here
included the development of C, and Bjorne Stroustrup (BYORN STROO-strup) developed C++
("see-plus-plus") here as well. For 10 points, the transistor was discovered at which scientific research
facility directed by a telephone company?
ANSWER: Bell Labs
One equation named for this man can be used to determine the conditions under which cavitation will occur,
and that equation states that density times gravitational acceleration times elevation plus one-half density
times velocity squared plus pressure is a constant. That equation mathematically expresses another concept
named for this man which explains the Venturi effect in a narrowing pipe. For 10 points, name this Swiss
mathematician whose principle states that if a fluid's velocity along a streamline increases, its pressure
decreases.
ANSWER: Daniel Bernoulli
This physicist wrote Hydrodynamica, and Timoshenko modified the beam equation that this physicist
developed with Euler. A Pitot tube measures velocity using this physicist's namesake equation, and that
equation gives the dynamic pressure of a fluid to be greatest at the stagnation point. Assuming laminar flow,
this scientist's namesake principle shows that when flow velocity is increased, such as in a restriction in a
pipe, fluid pressure decreases. For 10 points, name this scientist whose namesake principle describes how
airplane wings work.
ANSWER: Daniel Bernoulli
It may be reformulated to suggest that the piezometric head is equal to the opposite of the velocity head plus
a constant, which is in turn equal to a term for elevation and one for pressure. Resulting in the Venturi
effect, its basic form applies when the divergence of velocity is zero, a condition called isochoric. It states
that the sum of pressure with specific kinetic and potential energy is constant, meaning fast-moving fluids
exert less force in directions perpendicular to their flow. FTP, identify this effect partly responsible for lift
generated by airfoils.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle
Pitot tubes use this law to find velocity, and a special type of this principle is the Venturi effect. This
statement is the general case of Torricelli's law and can be found by integrating Euler's equation. Along
with Newton's laws of motion, this law helps to explain why airplanes lift, and a special case of it helps to
figure out why boats travel at a faster speed than the winds propelling them. For 10 points, name this
equation, important to hydrodynamics, which is named after a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's Principle [also accept Bernoulli's Law or Bernoulli's Equation]
This equation states that in conservative force fields, the sum of kinetic energy per mass, the force potential,
and the ratio of pressure to density is constant. It can also be written as the integral of an equation named
for Euler. Its application to constricted conditions describes the Venturi effect. Derived from conservation
of energy and only applicable to inviscid flow, it is often used incorrectly to explain how airplanes fly or
sailboats travel. For 10 points, name this equation inversely relating pressure and velocity, first expounded
in Hydrodynamica by a Dutch-Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's equation [or Bernoulli's principle, or Bernoulli's theorem]
This statement can be derived from the Euler equations by assuming that flow is steady and
irrotational. A simplified form of it states that the sum of dynamic and static pressure is constant. It
can be combined with the continuity equation inside a constricted pipe to describe the Venturi effect.
More generally, it states that, for an inviscid fluid, the sum of velocity squared over 2, pressure over
density, and potential energy is constant. The equal transit time (*) fallacy is an incorrect application of
this statement to airplane flight. It is essentially a statement of conservation of energy for fluids. For 10
points, name this principle that fluids exert less pressure when they move faster, named for a Swiss
physicist.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle [or Bernoulli's equation]
An analogous law in thermodynamics relates force potential, velocity, and specific energy, and dividing this
equation by the acceleration of gravity yields the head equation. It its original form, it asserts local energy
conservation for an incompressible fluid, and it explains the Venturi effect and Toricelli's law, as well as
aeronautical lift forces. For ten points, name this principle of fluid mechanics which states that an increase
in the speed of a fluid occurs simultaenously with a decrease in pressure or the fluid's potential energy,
named for a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle
This equation is applied to find delta-P in one derivation of the Kutta-Joukowski theorem. A limited
derivation of this statement can be found by integrating Euler's equation, and a special version of
this statement manifests itself in the Venturi effect. Pitot tubes use this principle to measure (*)
velocity. It states that the conservation of energy mandates that the sum of kinetic energy density, potential
energy density, and pressure is a constant along a streamline, under a steady flow with incompressible
fluids. For 10 points, name this principle named for a Swiss scientist, which helps explain how an airfoil
creates lift.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle
Under steady conditions, the Lamb surfaces coincide with surfaces on which the function named for this
equation is constant. In general, this equation relates the Eulerian time derivative of the velocity to the
gradient of its namesake function and the cross product of the velocity and vorticity. Pitot tubes apply this
result to calculate the velocity from measurements of the stagnation and static pressures in a flow. It can be
derived by integrating Euler's equation along a streamline, and it is equivalent to energy conservation. For
10 points, name this equation that implies that any change in flow speed must be accompanied by a
corresponding change in pressure or potential energy.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's Principle or equation
Integrating a streamline path for Euler's Equation gives this statement. The simplified form of this
statement often omits the rho-p-z term. The equation of continuity and this statement help to explain
the (*) Venturi Effect, and Torricelli's Law is a special case of this principle. This principle states that an
increase in velocity of a fluid causes a decrease in its pressure due to the conservation of energy, and this
statement helps explain lift. For 10 points, name this principle of fluid dynamics named after a Swiss
mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's Principle
A specific case of this equation sets velocity equal to the square root of 2gh. Venturi meters and pilot tubes
measure velocity using this equation, which is only applicable to compressible substances with low Mach
numbers. This equation is expressed as Torricelli's theorem when pressure is constant. This equation can be
derived from the conservation of energy, and it contains terms corresponding to the kinetic and potential
energies for fluids. It explains the net upward force experienced by airplane wings, known as dynamic lift.
For 10 points, name this equation that states that an increase in the speed of a fluid is accompanied by a
decrease in pressure, named for a Swiss scientist.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's equation [or Bernoulli's principle]
This principle is used to draw fuel into carburetors and explains why pressure changes in a
Venturi tube. Torricelli's law is a special case of this principle. This principle includes equations for
both compressible and incompressible flow. This principle, which is responsible for the lift
experienced by (*) airplanes, states that fluid pressure decreases when fluid velocity increases. For 10
points, name this principle of fluid dynamics that is named for a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle
One can use this equation to derive Luke's variational principle, an equation used to model behavior on the
surface. Velocity can be calculated when applying it to measurements taken with a Pitot tube. When the
fluid is compressible the specific heat of the fluid must be taken into account, but it becomes much simpler
when the fluid is incompressible like water. An application of it allows boats to travel faster than the wind
pushing their sails, as the sail can be used to create a pressure gradient. FTP, name this equation important
to hydrodynamics, used to describe fluid flow, named for a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's equation or Bernoulli's principle
One theorem by this name states that the virtual work done by a force acting on a rigid body is zero
when a small virtual displacement occurs. Another theorem with this name implies a relationship
between cross-sectional area and pressure that results in the Venturi Effect. It explains the Magnus Effect
and states that the sum of the kinetic energy, gravitational potential energy, and pressure of a fluid is
constant. For 10 points, name this theorem that states that the mechanical energy of laminar fluid flow
is conserved, the namesake of a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli Principle [accept Bernoulli's Theorem]
This equation can be used with a Venturi device to measure flow rate. One term in this equation accounts
for the gravitational potential energy of a fluid. This equation, which ignores internal friction and
compressibility, holds true because of the work-energy principle. This equation's namesake also names a
related effect in which pressure is reduced as flow rate increases. It can be used to calculate the dynamic lift
experienced by an object like an airplane wing. For 10 points, name this fluid-flow equation formulated by a
Swiss physicist.
ANSWER: Bernoulli equation
This principle explains why the use of greater camber allows for the operation of certain objects. This
theorem explains the changes that happen to certain molecules inside a Venturi tube. If there is no vertical
change in height, the equation for this law simplifies to one half the density times velocity squared plus the
pressure. This principle states that an increase in fluid velocity results in a decrease in fluid pressure. For 10
points, name this principle devised by a Swiss mathematician that helps explain the ability of airplanes to
achieve lift.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's Principle [or Bernoulli's Equation; or Bernoulli's Theorem; or Bernoulli's Law]
Used in carburetors to draw in fuel and mix it with the air, the Venturi effect is a case of this. In the
Venturi effect, fluid flowing through a pipe with a constriction in it must satisfy the equation of
continuity and the conservation of energy, thus producing a choked flow, used to control the delivery
of water through spigots and valves. The fallacy of the equal-transit-time theory makes the popular
explanation that lift on an airfoil is generated by this (*) effect false. However, it can be used to
calculate the air pressure and velocity over an aircraft wing, which may be the cause of the misconception.
FTP, name this principle in fluid dynamics stating that a decrease in fluid velocity results in an increase in
fluid pressure.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle or equations (accept "Venturi effect" before mentioned)
This law is used to derive Torricelli's law, and it is used to explain the role of cross-sectional area in the
Venturi Effect. This law is used in an aspirator, in which air is drawn into flowing water as water flows
through a constricted area. This law implies that an increase in the speed of water flow consequently results
in either a decrease in pressure or potential energy. For 10 points, identify this principle named for a Swiss
mathematician, which partially explains lift in an aircraft.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle
When this principle is applied with the continuity equation to a constricted region, the equation
for the Venturi effect results. Pitot tubes exploit this principle to measure the difference between the
top and bottom of an airplane wing. This principle is stated as (*) "one half times rho times v squared
plus rho times g times h plus p is constant." For 10 points, name this equation that relates changes in
potential energy or pressure to the speed of fluid flow, named for a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle [or Bernoulli's equation]
Integrating Euler's equation along a streamline can be used to derive the equation of this principle, which
explains the Magnus effect. It can also be used to explain the Venturi effect, and it obeys the law of
conservation of energy along a streamline. First published in its namesake's Hydrodynamica, it states that
the sum of the kinetic energy density, gravitational potential energy, and pressure of a fluid is constant. For
10 points, identify this principle of fluid mechanics used to explain the lift on airplanes.
ANSWER: Bernoulli Principle or Bernoulli Equation
This principle can be derived from the law of conservation of energy, and a particular case of this is
Torricelli's theorem. Another effect derived from this is the Venturi effect, which describes a reduction of
pressure under certain conditions. This principle holds only for inviscid flow and can be applied to gases at
low Mach number. FTP, name this principle, which states that an increase in the speed of a fluid can occurs
simultaneously with a decrease in pressure or potential energy, and which can be used to explain the
phenomena of lift and curveballs.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle
In irrotational cases, an unsteady form of this statement using the derivative of the velocity potential
can be derived. An energy form of this statement is used to show the balance between enthalpy and
temperature along a streamline in high-speed gas flows. This statement is usually derived by
integrating the Euler equations for inviscid flow along a streamline. This law is described by an
equation in which one-half times the density times the velocity squared, plus density times gravitational
acceleration times height, plus pressure equals a constant. For 10 points, identify this eponymous law which
gives the result that the pressure of a fluid drops as the velocity of the fluid flow increases.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle [or law or equation]
This principle, which can be derived from Euler's continuity and momentum equations, is used to explain
the Venturi effect. This applies to inviscid situations, meaning a lack of viscosity, and can be derived from
the Navier-Stokes equation. This principle is based on the conservation of energy along a streamline,
including the energy attributable to pressure. Identify this equation named for a Swiss scientist showing that
a decrease in pressure leads to an increase in speed for fluid flow.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle or equation
This explains why sailboats can move faster than the speed of the wind pushing them. This can be applied in
its namesake's equation for incompressible as well as compressible flows at low Mach numbers. This was
first published in its namesake's book Hydronamica, and is one explanation of why airplanes get lift as they
increase their speed. FTP, name this principle which states that the velocity of a fluid is inversely
proportional to the pressure the fluid exerts on its container.
ANSWER: Bernoulli Principle
The Sood Effect combines this and the Seebeck Effect, and one practical application is the rheolytic
thrombectomy catheter. Longuet-Higgins derived a set of integral relations shown to be equivalent to this
equation for gravity waves. It can be derived by integrating the Euler equations, or the Navier-Stokes
equations ignoring friction. Adding an extra term of internal energy per unit mass extends this principle to
compressible fluids, and it neglects the viscous terms found in the Hagen-Poisueille equation. FTP, what is
this principle in fluid dynamics which states that as pressure changes, velocity changes inversely, named
after a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's Principle
This equation can be obtained by integrating the Euler equations along a streamline, and this law
governs the operation of airfoils. Name this equation from fluid dynamics. It is a restatement of energy
conservation stating that an increase in a fluid's flow rate is accompanied by a decrease in potential energy
or a decrease in pressure.
ANSWER: Bernoulli equation
The Kutta-Joukowski theorem is derived from this result, and Ludwig Prandtl used Euler's equation to
expand it to non-ideal states. Pitot tubes measure velocity and are based on this result, and the Venturi
Effect is essentially an expression of this law for an incompressible fluid bottlenecked in a pipe. During a
hurricane, windows tend to explode outwards than inwards because of this. Due to the conservation of
energy, an increase in kinetic energy necessarily causes a decrease in pressure energy. For 10 points, name
this principle, named after a Swiss mathematician, which explains the lift which allows airplanes to operate.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle, effect, law, or equation
Under steady conditions, the Lamb surfaces coincide with surfaces on which the function named for this
equation is constant. In general, this equation relates the Eulerian time derivative of the velocity to the
gradient of its namesake function and the cross product of the velocity and vorticity. Pitot tubes apply this
result to calculate the velocity from measurements of the stagnation and static pressures in a flow. It can be
derived by integrating Euler's equation along a streamline, and it is equivalent to energy conservation. For
10 points, name this equation that implies that any change in flow speed must be accompanied by a
corresponding change in pressure or potential energy.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's Principle or equation
The head equation is derived from this statement by dividing each term by the acceleration of gravity. It can
be derived by integrating Euler's equation. Pitot tubes operate by this principle, which gives rise to the
Venturi effect. Resulting from the law of conservation of energy, it follows from the fact that the sum of
kinetic and potential energy must remain constant for all points along a streamline. It states that an increase
in fluid flow accompanies a decrease in pressure. For 10 points, name this principle that partially explains
the lift generated by airfoils.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle, law, equation, or effect
This equation is used to derive the Gorlin Valve Equation, and in MHD, an analogue of this equation
contains the sound speed squared divided by the specific heat ratio plus the square of the Alfven
speed. This equation can be derived by integrating the Euler equation along a streamline, and
applying it to the bottom and top of an airfoil lets you calculate the lift. The Pitot tube and the Venturi
flow meter operate based on this equation, which also explains the increase in flow velocity as the diameter
decreases. For 10 points, name this equation that can be stated as the sum of the kinetic energy,
gravitational energy, and energy associated with fluid pressure of an ideal fluid is constant and the named
after a Dutch-Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's Equation (Accept "Bernoulli's Theorem" or "Bernoulli's Principle")
This statement includes a term equal to the kinetic energy per unit volume, often called the "dynamic
pressure". A law giving the speed of outflow for a hole in a tank a certain height above the ground is
derived from this law, as is an effect in which pressure is lowered in a constricted section of pipe.
(*) Torricelli's law and the Venturi effect result from this principle, a statement of the conservation of
energy in a fluid. This principle explains why an increase in fluid speeds results in a decrease in pressure
and is often falsely used to explain lift on airplanes. For 10 points, name this fundamental principle of fluid
dynamics, named for a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle or law or equation or effect (or other reasonable equivalents)
This statement can be derived if one sets the viscosity terms of the Navier-Stokes equations to zero,
creating the Euler equations, and then integrates along a streamline. This statement is the general
case of Torricelli's law, and Venturi manometers work because of it. This principle follows from the
fact that the sum of potential and kinetic energies must [*] remain constant along streamlines. Stating
that an increase in speed of flow results in a decrease in pressure or potential energy, for 10 points, name
this principle that partially explains how airfoils lift planes, named for one member of a family of Swiss
mathematicians.
ANSWER: Bernoulli's principle [or the Bernoulli equation, law, or effect]
This letter names a function in quantum field theory that relates the coupling parameter to the energy
scale. One quantity denoted by this letter is equal to one over Boltzmann's constant times temperature; that
quantity appears in the exponential of Boltzmann factors. This letter is also used to symbolize the ratio of
an object's speed to the speed of light. In one process named for this letter, a down quark changes to an up
quark, releasing an electron and an electron antineutrino. That process, which is mediated by the weak
force, keeps a nucleus- mass number constant but changes the number of protons. For 10 points, identify
this Greek letter which names a form of decay in which a positron or electron is emitted.
ANSWER: beta
This process is studied using the Fermi-Kurie plot, and one form of this process is used to generate
annihilation photons detected in PET scans. That form can only occur when the generated energy is
greater than two times the speed of light squared times the mass of a certain particle. Its mechanism
typically involves a flavor change, and types include electron capture and positron emission. For 10
points, identify this form of radioactive decay associated with an increase in atomic number, which can
penetrate further than alpha decay.
ANSWER: beta decay
The Fermi-Kurie plot models this process, which is undergone by Germanium-76, resulting in the emission
of a Majorana particle, which is known as the "double" type of this process. This process is the result of the
conversion of a down quark to an up quark via the emission of a W minus boson, and an electron neutrino
or anti-neutrino is typically released to conserve lepton number. Sometimes occurring with electron capture,
for 10 points, name this type of radioactive decay in which a positron or electron is emitted from a nucleus
in its plus or minus versions.
ANSWER: beta decay or emission
The double form of this process can be used to experimentally search for a Majorana particle. Cobalt-60
underwent this process in an experiment which confirmed parity violation that was performed by Wu. This
process is caused by the weak force acting on a single quark, and it sees the emission of a neutrino or
antineutrino. This process sees no change in the mass number of the atom involved, but it does see a change
in the atomic number. For 10 points, name this type of decay which sees the emission of an electron or a
positron and is contrasted with another type of decay that sees the emission of an alpha particle.
ANSWER: beta decay
The Gamow-Teller mode requires that the spin of the baryons point in the opposite direction during
this process. This process can be studied using the Fermi-Kurie plot, and nuclei undergoing this
process result in other isobaric nuclei. In 1934, it was proposed that this process creates a third
particle, allowing energy and momentum to be conserved, though that third particle had not yet been
observed. Both (*) electron capture and the "plus" form of this process can decrease the charge of a
nucleus, while in the "minus" form a neutron becomes a proton. For 10 points, name this type of
radioactive decay in which a nucleus emits an electron or positron.
ANSWER: beta decay or [accept beta-minus decay; accept beta-plus decay until "opposite"]
The energy of this process can be determined from a Kurie plot, and Wu showed that this process
violates CP symmetry. One form of this weak-force-mediated phenomenon decreases the atomic number
by one. That form is similar to electron capture. Free neutrons undergo this process with a half-life of about
10.3 minutes, splitting into a proton, an antineutrino, and an electron, this process's namesake particle. For
10 points, name this type of radioactive decay contrasted with gamma and alpha.
ANSWER: beta decay
This process violates parity conservation in cobalt-sixty, as discovered by the winners of the 1957 Nobel
prize in physics. The distribution of energy from this process was the inspiration for Pauli postulating the
neutrino. Fermi's theory about this process includes his "golden rule", though Fermi did not know that the
mechanism for this process is the weak interaction. This event is used to activate a phosphor in tritium
illumination, wherein the tritium becomes stable helium. Name this process in which a neutron turns into a
proton, an antineutrino, and an electron.
ANSWER: beta-minus decay [or negative beta decay; accept electron emission before the last sentence]
Iodine and Xenon lie at the base of a valley of stability in which this process does not occur.
Neutron stars would degenerate in 10 minutes through this process if all electron states weren't filled
in the core. This phenomenon was used to derive Fermi's Golden Rule. The NEMO-3 experiment
searches for a variant of it that can only occur if the neutrino is its own antiparticle. This process
uses an intermediate W boson to transform a (*) down quark into an up quark or vice versa. This
phenomenon, which is responsible for changing carbon-14 to nitrogen-14 with a half-life of 5700 years,
changes the atomic number by one but leaves the atomic mass constant. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a nucleus emits either a positron or an electron.
ANSWER: beta decay [accept beta-plus decay or beta-minus decay; prompt on "decay", "radioactive decay", or "nuclear decay"]
Energy emission during this process partly occurs due to "Inner Brehmsstralung", and its spectrum
is directly proportional to an F of Z comma E term, which is normalized for when visualizing it on a
Kurie plot. Isobaric compounds can interconvert via this process, while one version of this
phenomenon has a rate proportional to the square of a polynomial of MNS matrix elements, and can
be neutrinoless if the neutrino is a Majorana particle. Its Feynman diagram shows that it results from
transformation of down quark to an up quark by expelling a W-minus boson, mediated by the weak force.
Encompassing electron capture and positron emission, for 10 points, name this process in which a nucleus
emits an electron and an antineutrino, which is distinct from alpha or gamma decay.
ANSWER: Beta decay
In 1920, this became the first star to have its size measured by a beam interferometer, and scientists have
measured a fifteen percent shrinkage of its size during the last twenty years. This star, Sirius, and Procyon
form the Winter Triangle, and, like Antares, this is a first magnitude supergiant. Though it is usually not as
bright as Rigel, this star is classified as their constellation's alpha star. Alternatively known as Al Mankib,
name this right shoulder of Orion located opposite from Bellatrix.
ANSWER: Betelgeuse (prompt on "Alpha Orion")
This idea was first discussed by the Belgian priest Georges Lemaitre, who called it the "hypothesis of
the primeval atom," but was given its current name by Fred Hoyle. The Planck epoch occurred
immediately after it, and less than a (*) second had gone by before hadrons were formed. CMBR is a
remnant of this event, which has also been verified by Hubble's observations. Occurring a little over 13
billion years ago, for ten points, what is this theory, which posits that the universe began from a single point
and rapidly expanded?
ANSWER: Big Bang
Ralph Alpher reconciled this theory with the current levels of hydrogen and helium in the universe.
James Jeans's steady-state theory was replaced by this idea, whose early proponents included Alexander
Friedmann, Georges Lemaitre (LEH-met), and George Gamow. Penzias and Wilson's discovery of cosmic
microwave background radiation supported this theory. For ten points, identify this cosmological theory of
the origin of the universe, named for a metaphorical "explosion."
ANSWER: Big Bang theory
Pope Pius XII, upon being told of this theory by its originator, offered to make it dogma, but its
originator refused. Support for this theory was bolstered by the work of Arno (+) Penzias and Robert
Wilson, who detected the CMB. Though it was proposed by George Lemaitre as the hypothesis of the
primeval atom, its name was originally coined by Fred (*) Hoyle as a perjorative, because Hoyle
supported its competing steady-state theory. For 10 points, name this theory which states that, about14
billion years ago, the universe exploded out of a primeval hot, dense state.
ANSWER: Big Bang theory
Challenges to it include observations of globular clusters judged to be too old for it to be correct. Another
problem arises when considering baryon asymmetry, or the fact that the universe has far more matter than
antimatter. Some of the strongest evidence for it is given by Hubble's Law, which states that the redshift
from other galaxies is proportional to their distance, thus supporting the expanding space paradigm. FTP,
name this theory which proposes that the universe was initially an extremely dense, hot mass which
exploded.
ANSWER: Big Bang Theory
Roger Penrose hypothesized that the Weyl curvature tensor vanished during this phenomenon, which
explains its low entropy. The fact that this phenomenon did not cause magnetic monopoles was
explained by Alan Guth, whose theory also accounts for isotropy, or the uniformity of space in
different directions. The theory behind this phenomenon gained significant support following Arno
Penzias and Robert Wilson's 1964 discovery of the cosmic microwave background, weakening steady
state theory. This event was followed by the Planck epoch, grand unification epoch, and electroweak
epoch. Name this event that, over thirteen billion years ago, started the universe.
ANSWER: big bang
The baryon-to-photon ratio can be used to compute the products of the nucleosynthesis predicted by this
theory. As originally posited, this theory suffers from the flatness, horizon, and monopole problems, which
prompted Guth and Linde to develop inflation. This theory, which was partly confirmed by Penzias and
Wilson's discovery of the CMB, was originally posited by Lemaitre after Hubble discovered redshift. For
10 points, name this theory which states that a singularity of infinite density and temperature exploded into
the universe.
ANSWER: big bang theory
This event was immediately followed by the mysterious Planck time. Its occurrence can be verified by
the fact that matter, at sufficiently large scales, is homogenous and isotropic, as well as by the uniform 2.73
Kelvin temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. It was accompanied by a very rapid
inflation and soon followed by recombination, during which electrons and protons cooled enough to form
atoms. For 10 points, identify this event which occurred roughly fourteen billion years ago and began the
existence of the universe.
ANSWER: the Big Bang
An alternative to this theory proposed by Fritz Zwicky is called the "tired light" model. A problem
with this theory that wonders why total density was so exact is called the (+) "flatness problem." A
Belgian priest named George Lemaitre (leh-MATE-ruh) first proposed this idea. It was justified by
Penzias and Wilson's discovery of the (*) cosmic microwave background radiation. For 10 points, name
this theory which proposes that cosmic inflation led the universe to expand rapidly from a small core.
ANSWER: Big Bang theory
This event preceded Planck time, and during this event, rapid expansion and then sufficient cooling
occurred, which caused subatomic particles to recombine and create atoms. Some arguments meant to
disprove this event include the Horizon issue and the Flatness problem, both of which deal with the
discrepancies with the laws of physics that rapid expansion proposes. One effect of this event was the 2.73
Kelvin temperature cosmic microwave background radiation. For 10 points, identify this theory that
proposes a large scale explosion of particles, creating the universe.
ANSWER: Big Bang Theory
The Alpher-Bethe-Gamow paper was early support for the nucleosynthesis caused by this phenomenon.
Occuring during the Planck epoch, this period was quickly followed by cosmic inflation. Supported by the
existence of the cosmic microwave background radiation, it occurred about 13.7 billion years ago. For 10
points, name this most popular theory regarding the formation the formation of the universe, which states
that the universe was once dense but expanded rapidly.
ANSWER: the Big Bang theory
The production of helium isotopes shortly after this event is governed by its namesake
"nucleosynthesis." The WMAP spacecraft analyzes a radiant heat that lingered long after this event,
known as the cosmic microwave background radiation. This event was named by Fred (*) Hoyle.
Cosmic inflation occurred for 10 to the minus 36 seconds after this event. This event was propelled by
extremely hot and dense matter cooling down. For 10 points, name this event that happened 13.75 billion
years ago, the birth of the universe.
ANSWER: Big Bang [prompt on the birth of the universe or related answers until mention]
The parameters of this process was used to constrain the mass of the tau neutrino. Hayashi modified the
original theory of this process to account for relativity. The original paper which outlined this process cited
Hughes work showing that plotting the neutron capture rate versus atomic number of heavier elements
creates a flat graph. The ratios of products in this process is constrained by the baryon-to-photon ratio, as
outlined in a paper by Alpher, Bethe, and Gamow. This process is predicted to produce about 25% helium-4
by mass after the universe cooled enough to avoid the deuterium bottleneck. This process occurred between
3 minutes and 20 minutes after the Big Bang. For 10 points, name this process in which baryonic matter
formed heavier elements soon after the birth of the universe.
ANSWER: Big Bang nucleosynthesis [or BBN; accept just "nucleosynthesis" after the Big Bang is mentioned, prompt beforehand; prompt on "baryogenesis"]
Assuming that an ekpyrotic phase precedes this event implies that the scalar field kinetic energy
would dominate the energy density. Steinhardt and Turok proposed that this event is a collision
between two branes. A universe with positive (*) curvature, or density parameter greater than 1, and no
dark energy would end in this way. This outcome is contrasted with maximum entropy and no
thermodynamic free energy called the Big Freeze. For 10 points, what event is the theoretical fate of the
universe if the expansion is not sufficient to counteract gravitation so that everything contracts to a black
hole?
ANSWER: the Big Crunch
The first statistical study of these objects was published in 1935 by Gerard Kuiper, who noted a large period
gap in the two subpopulations of these objects. The fact that most planetary nebulae are non-spherical
suggests that they are formed by ejection from these objects. Methods of discovering these objects include
the common proper motion technique as well as observing dual sets of spectroscopic lines with periodically
varying radial velocities and eclipsing patterns. In these systems, mass transfer occurs through the first
Lagrangian point when one object within them accretes enough mass to fill its Roche lobe. Examples of
these objects include Mizar, the middle star of the Big Dipper's handle, and Algol. For 10 points, identify
these systems which consist of a pair of stars in mutual orbit.
ANSWER: binary star systems
These entities can undergo gas accretion caused by Roche lobe overflow; in 2004, it was discovered that
these led to the 1572 supernova studied by Tycho Brahe. Pinwheel nebulae can form around these objects,
and the discovery of one of these systems, consisting of pulsars, won the 1993 Nobel in Physics for Hulse
and Taylor. Studying the Doppler shift of spectral lines can allow discovery of spectroscopic types of these,
while other types include astrometric and eclipsing. Name this type of celestial system, the most famous
example of which consists of Sirius A and Sirius B rotating around the pair's center of mass.
ANSWER: binary star [or binary system, etc.; prompt on answers like star system]
VW Cephei contains what is probably the largest red giant yet discovered, and is the contact variety
of this entity. Astrometric ones contain a very dim or invisible object. Objects in this type of system
have regions of gravitational influence known as Roche lobes. One variety of these systems,
exemplified by Algol, has two dips in luminosity as the rotating objects come between the viewer and a
star; that is the eclipsing type of these systems. For 10 points, name these systems that consist of two
stars.
ANSWER: binary systems [or binary stars]
Important parameters in the design of these devices are Gummel numbers, which represent the total
majority carriers in the two regions where they are defined. Punch-through is a phenomenon that must be
avoided in normal operation as is thermal runaway, which was more of a problem in early devices
fabricated from germanium. The large-signal characteristics are usually derived from the Ebers-Moll model,
which models the emitter and collector regions as current sources. These devices can be used as switches
but are more commonly used as amplifiers. For 10 points, name these electronic devices, invented by
William Shockley in 1948 that come in n-p-n and p-n-p varieties.
ANSWER: bipolar junction transistors or BJTs
One model of these devices is known as the most exquisite model. An older method for making these is
the double diffused epitaxial process. For one of these devices, the transport factor over one minus the
transport factor is equal to the gain. Their modes of operation are cutoff, forward active, reverse active, and
saturation. They are the subject of the Gummel-Poon and the Ebbers-Moll models. The increase of a
particular voltage in one causes an increase in current known as the Early effect. They can be of either pnp
or npn form, and they consist of a collector, base, and emitter. For 10 points, name this type of transistor
that contrast with field effect transistors.
ANSWER: bipolar junction transistor [or BJT; prompt on "transistor"]
It can occur in crystals lacking a center of symmetry via the Pockels effect. Nicol and Wollaston
prisms utilize this property through the application of (*) calcite. When an electric field is applied to an
anisotropic transparent substance, it occurs through the Kerr effect and it arises in materials possessing two
different indices of refraction. For 10 points, identify this optical phenomenon that divides unpolarized light
into an ordinary and an extraordinary ray traveling in different directions.
ANSWER: birefringence (or double refraction)
When this property is observed in liquids, it is called the Cotton-Mouton effect, and materials exhibiting it
are arranged as half of another element's thickness in multiple-plate Lyot filters. It is seen in materials
whose permittivity tensor is not proportional to the identity tensor, resulting in anisotropy with respect to a
given axis, and it can be observed in gases in a magnetic field in an effect named for Voigt. The quarterwave plate consists of varying thicknesses of materials exhibiting this property, and it is most commonly
seen in materials like Wollaston prisms, which are composed of calcite. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon where a light beam splits into two upon entering a medium, sometimes called double
refraction.
ANSWER: birefringence [prompt on double refraction]
This behavior can be induced in magnetized semi-conductors by polaron binding to impurities, in
which case it is proportional to the deviation from the equilibrium of the first-order admittance
tensor. Materials with this property can be used to create quasi-phase-matching filters by application
of an electric field in the technique of periodic poling. Plasmas and some other fluids can acquire a
value for this effect proportional to the square of an applied magnetic field in forms of the (*) Cotton-
Mouton and Voight effects. Applying an electric field to an anisotropic material induces this property due to
the difference in Pockels effects along different axes. For 10 points, name this optical property of materials,
the existence of different indices of indices of refraction in different directions, which cases incident light
rays to be split.
ANSWER: birefringence
Patients that have alkaptonuria excrete urine with this color. Manganese dioxide and silver sulfide are
both this color. Rapidly water-cooled rhyolitic flows form a glass with this color. An astronomical object
named for this color can be described by charge, mass, and spin according to the no-hair theorem. The
gravity of that object is impossible to escape at sub-luminal speeds within the event horizon. For 10 points,
identify this color which absorbs all light that shines upon it, unlike white.
ANSWER: black [or black holes; or black urine disease]
This term was first used by Gustav Kirchhoff in relation to his work in spectroscopy. Wilhelm Wien
considered the effect of temperature on them in his Displacement Law, and another important relation
involving their temperature is established in the Stefan-Boltzmann Law. Wien's Distribution Law and the
Rayleigh-Jeans Law both failed to predict their emission spectra for all wavelengths, but these shortcomings
were solved by Planck's Law dealing with their radiation. FTP, name these objects which absorb all
electromagnetic radiation and are ideal thermal radiators.
ANSWER: Black Bodies
Applying the equipartition theorem to these objects gives the result that that their power is
proportional to the square of the frequency, meaning they radiate infinite power at high frequency.
That "ultraviolet catastrophe" was solved by Planck using energy quantization. By definition they
have an emissivity of 1. Their energy flux density is proportional to the fourth power of their
temperature according to the (*) Stefan-Boltzmann Law. For 10 points, name these theoretical objects
which are perfect absorbers and emitters of electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: blackbodies [accept "blackbody radiation"]
The spectral radiance of these objects is given by Lambert's cosine law. A star's surface temperature is
found by using its peak wavelength and treating it as one of these objects. One early attempt to model these
objects led to the "ultraviolet catastrophe" and was the Rayleigh-Jeans law. The peak wavelength of these
objects is equal to the displacement constant over its temperature by Wien's (WEINZ) law. The power
radiated by these objects is given by Planck's law. For 10 points, name these objects that are perfect
absorbers.
ANSWER: blackbody
Historically, it was believed that these objects could be modeled as a cavity with equally likely modes
that increased with frequency. The fourth power of temperature is proportional to the flux emitted by one of
these according to the Stefan-Boltzmann (STEF-on BOLTS-mon) law. They have a wavelength of
maximum intensity described by Wien's (VEENZ) displacement law. The ultraviolet catastrophe describes
the breakdown of the Rayleigh-Jeans Law governing radiation from these entities. For 10 points, name these
objects that absorb all incoming energy.
ANSWER: blackbody
These objects are the subject of a law that equates their temperature to the constant b over the peak
wavelength. You can take that temperature to the fourth power, and multiply by the constant sigma, to find
the energy flux density of one of these objects. One law that attempted to model the spectral radiance of
these objects led to the "ultraviolet catastrophe." The classical Rayleigh-Jeans law for their spectral
radiance was replaced by Planck's law. For 10 points, name these ideal physical objects that absorb all
external radiation, and thus would appear very dark.
ANSWER: a black body [or black bodies]
Historically, it was believed that these objects could be modeled as a cavity with equally likely modes that
increased with frequency. The fourth power of temperature is proportional to the flux emitted by one of
these according to the Stefan-Boltzmann (STEF-on BOLTS-mon) law. They have a wavelength of
maximum intensity described by Wien's (VEENZ) displacement law. The ultraviolet catastrophe describes
the breakdown of the Rayleigh-Jeans Law governing radiation from these entities. For 10 points, name these
objects that absorb all incoming energy.
ANSWER: black body
E. R. Williams has pioneered a method to use these entities to induce gas phase dissociation for tandem
mass spectroscopy. Sakuma and Hattori name a formula for determining the radiative flux of one of these
objects in terms of temperature. These objects were empirically modeled by a law named for Planck, while
a first-order approximation to that formula proved to be essential in the development of quantum
mechanics, as the Rayleigh-Jeans law predicted an unphysical "ultraviolet catastrophe". The heat emitted
by one of these is proportional to the fourth power of its temperature according to the Stefan-Boltzmann
law. For 10 points, name these objects that are perfect absorbers of radiation.
ANSWER: black bodies
Electromagnetic signal from this phenomenon can be related temperature by the Sakuma-Hattori equation.
One law describing this phenomenon states that the peak wavelength of it is inversely proportional to
temperature. Another law that governs it states that intensity is a function of temperature to the fourth
power. In addition to Wien's displacement law, another law governing this type of radiation was derived by
finding the number of moves for standing waves in a cubical cavity. That law, the Rayleigh-Jeans law,
experiences an ultraviolet catastrophe, which can be avoided by using Planck's law to describe this type of
radiation. Name this type of radiation, exhibited by an object that absorbs all incident electromagnetic
radiation.
ANSWER: black-body radiation
These objects may be described as perfect Lambertians, and one law about these objects predicts the
ultraviolet catastrophe. Another law concerning these entities explains the utility of infrared sensors because
it predicts that an object's temperature is two point nine millimeters Kelvin divided by the wavelength at
which it radiates the most, which can be modeled by a curve named for Planck. Besides the Rayleigh-Jeans
law and Wien's law, a better-known equation predicts that the radiant flux of a black body is proportional to
the fourth power of its temperature. FTP, identify these objects that absorb all incident light.
ANSWER: black body
A paradoxical result associated with this object whose name was coined by Paul Ehrenfest in 1911 is in
part due to the relationship between frequency and the emitted energy of this object defined by the
Rayleigh-Jeans law. That result suggests that at high frequencies the radiated energy of this body goes to
infinity. Known as the "ultraviolet catastrophe" other equations which govern this object's properties
include Wien's displacement and Planck's Law. For 10 points, name this object which absorbs all
electromagnetic radiation incident upon it.
ANSWER: black-body
Imperfect varieties of these entities have emissivities of less than one. One law governing the behavior
of these objects performs poorly at long wavelengths, while another predicts infinite power at small
wavelengths, leading to the ultraviolet catastrophe. Wien's Law and the Rayleigh-Jeans law
describing these objects were replaced by a law in which energy was [*] quantized. The energy radiated
per unit surface area by one of these objects is proportional to the fourth power of its temperature according
to the Stefan-Boltzmann law. Their namesake spectrally-continuous radiation is described by Planck's law.
For 10 points, name these objects that absorb all radiation falling on them.
ANSWER: black body [or black bodies]
Laboratory models for these entities include hohlraums, which are covered in a nickel phosphorus
alloy. One of the early methods of modeling these entities involved calculating the number of
standing waves inside and summing all possible modes over the volume. One equation governing
these contains a term with the fifth power of the wavelength in the denominator, and instead of
integrating that law the Sakuma-Hattori equation is often used instead. That law replaced another
which failed due to the equipartition theorem, which Ehrenfest called the ultraviolet catastrophe.
Kirchoff's law of these states that their emissivity is 1. These entities have luminosity proportional to the
fourth power of temperature in the Stefan-Boltzman law. For 10 points, name these perfect thermal emitters
equivalent to a hole in an oven which are modeled by the incorrect Rayleigh-Jeans and more correct
Planck's Law.
ANSWER: Blackbodies
Japanese scientists have recently used vertical single-walled carbon nanotubes to simulate one of these
objects, effective over wavelengths 0.2 to 200 micrometers, and color temperature is determined by
comparing an object's chromaticity to the chromaticity of one of these. Wien's distribution law is the highfrequency version of the Rayleigh-Jeans law for describing radiation from one, which is proportional to
temperature to the fourth power according to the Stefan-Boltzmann law. For 10 points, name this term for
an idealized object that absorbs all forms of electromagnetism, including visible light.
ANSWER: black body radiator [do not accept "black hole"]
Lummer and Kurlbaum modeled these objects as a cavity with a miniscule hole. A law derived by
multiplying the Bose-Einstein distribution by the density of states gives these objects- peak energy as
roughly 2.8 times the Boltzmann constant times temperature, in accord with Wien's law. A function of the
frequency of these objects squared fails at low wavelengths in the ultraviolet catastrophe. That law, the
Rayleigh-Jeans law, was improved by Planck. Their emissive power is proportional to temperature to the
fourth power. For 10 points, name these theoretical bodies named for their ability to absorb and re-radiate
all incident electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: blackbodies
One law describing these objects gives an inverse relationship between the temperature and the
maximum wavelength emitted, related by a constant that is about 2.897 times ten to the negative
third power. Another law describing these objects states the power they emit is proportional to
temperature raised to the fourth power. A third law describing them fails at short wavelengths in a
situation known as the ultraviolet catastrophe. For 10 points, name these objects described by Wien's
approximation, the Stefan-Boltzmann law and the Rayleigh-Jeans, an idealized object which absorb all
radiation.
ANSWER: blackbody
One law governing these entities is derived by applying Bose-Einstein statistics to a photon gas in
a cavity, and predicts an energy dependence proportional to the negative fifth power of wavelength.
The cosmic microwave background approximates the continuous spectrum of these objects. Applying
classical physics to one of these objects gives a law that states that their energy spectrum diverges to
infinity at high frequency. A constant of 5.67 times 10 to the negative 8 relates the (*) emissivity of
these objects to the fourth power of temperature. Planck's Law replaced that law named for Rayleigh and
Jeans, and the Stefan-Boltzmann law also applies to them. For 10 points, identify these ideal objects which
absorb all incident radiation.
ANSWER: black body
The shape of the namesake curve of these objects is independent of temperature, according to Wien's
(VEENS) displacement law. The fact that the Rayleigh-Jeans law describing them fails at high frequencies
led to the ultraviolet catastrophe. That catastrophe regarding these objects was resolved by a law that took
into account the fact that only certain wavelengths can be emitted, Planck's law. For 10 points, name these
objects which absorb all incident electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: black bodies [or a black body]
The Penrose Process could be used to extract usable energy from the ergosphere of some of these
entities, and the no-hair theorem states that they can be characterized by only mass, charge, and
angular momentum. Above the TOV limit, neutron stars may form these, and if any object's size is
below the (*) Schwarzchild radius, it will collapse into a singularity and form one of these. With many of
the "supermassive" variety existing at the center of galaxies, for ten points, what are these extremely dense
objects, from which, upon crossing the event horizon, not even light can escape?
ANSWER: Black Holes
Introducing a flat space approximation for their outer regions into their metric yields Rindler
geometry. One proposed solutions to their information loss problem is the holographic principle. One
theorem states that these objects are describable by just three parameters. One type is named for
Kerr and their size can be thought of as the (*) Schwarzschild radius. Surrounded by an event horizon,
they contain a singularity. They can be formed by the collapse of massive stars. For 10 points, name this
objects from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black holes [or event horizon before "three parameters"]
Neutron-degenerate matter can become one of these entities above the Tollman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit,
and quasars are often found around them. These objects have only three externally measurable properties:
mass, charge, and angular momentum, according to the "no-hair theorem", and they allegedly evaporate via
Hawking radiation. Physics breaks down at their singularities, inside their event horizons. For 10 points,
name these incredibly dense stellar remnants from which nothing, not even light, can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
When these objects are rotating, the Kerr metric describes them. They can be described by their mass,
charge and spin according to the no-hair theorem. When the mass of a neutron star exceeds the
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, the star may form one of these. The Schwarzchild radius is the
distance from their center to the event horizons that surround them. The supermassive type is found at the
center of galaxies. For 10 points, name these regions from which light can-t escape.
ANSWER: black holes
If one of these objects has an ergosphere, energy may be extracted from it until it loses its angular
momentum. If it does not possess electric charge, it will become the Schwarzchild type once it stops
rotating. The (*) no-hair theorem states that mass, charge, and angular momentum are their only
observable qualities outside the event horizon. For 10 points, name these astronomical objects from which
not even light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
The Reissner-Nordstrom metric describes entities of this type with an electrical charge, while the
Holographic principle resolves the information paradox associated with them. One is believed to be located
near Sagittarius A* (A-Star), and they can be identified only by their mass, charge, and angular momentum
according to the no-hair theorem. Non-rotating ones with a net charge of zero are labeled as the
Schwarzchild variety. Some are created when a star with a core above the Chandrasekhar limit collapses,
and galactic nuclei are believed to consist of the supermassive type of these. For 10 points, name these
objects from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black holes
Solutions to the Einstein field equations for these entities are named for Reissner, Nordstrom, and Kerr.
Energy and mass can theoretically be extracted from them in their ergospheres, and they are completely
characterized by their mass, angular momentum, and charge. These entities are subject to the no-hair
theorem, and they are predicted to emit Hawking radiation. Their size can be described using the
Schwarzschild radius, and at their center lies a gravitational singularity. For 10 points, name these massive
astronomical objects from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: Black Holes
The fact that the entropy of these objects is proportional to their area rather than their volume led to
the proposal of the holographic principle. The Penrose process can be used to extract energy from
their ergospheres. These entities can be described by just three parameters: mass, charge and
angular momentum according to the no-hair theorem. The Sagittarius A-star is believed to be a (*)
supermassive one. Most galaxies are believed to contain one at their centers, and the effects of falling into
one is called spaghettification. For 10 points, name these astronomical bodies that have event horizons from
which not even light can escape.
ANSWER: Black Hole
The entropy of one of these objects is proportional to the third power of the speed of light and
proportional to its area. They can be described by only mass, charge, and angular momentum according to
the no-hair theorem. The Schwarzschild radius determines the event horizon of these objects. They are
thought to emit Hawking radiation, and can be formed following the collapse of large stars. For 10 points,
identify these very dense objects in space, from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black holes
These objects- thermodynamic processes inspired the holographic principle, and the ergosphere surrounds a
rotating one of these objects. They can evaporate due to virtual particles in Hawking Radiation. Mass,
angular momentum, and electric charge can completely describe a stationary one of these objects. The
entropy of these objects is proportional to the area of their surface, which is called the event horizon. For 10
points, identify these celestial objects with a singularity at their centers and from which not even light can
escape.
ANSWER: black holes
One quantity important to the formation of these objects is equal to two G M divided by c squared.
Frame dragging occurs in the ergosphere surrounding these entities. Schwarzschild was the first to present
a mathematical solution to the problem of these entities, which are bounded by an event horizon. For 10
points, name this entity predicted by general relativity, in which no light can escape.
ANSWER: Black Hole
These objects can form when a body's mass passes the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. These
objects can be completely described by mass, angular momentum, and electric charge, according to the "no
hair" theorem. It is believed that almost all galaxies have a supermassive one of these objects at their
center. For 10 points, name this astronomical objects within which gravity is so strong that not even light
can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
The formula for the entropy of one of these entities includes a proportionality constant of
Boltzmann's constant over four and includes the inverse square of the Planck length. These bodies
are surrounded by an ergosphere, and their characteristics are described by the no-hair theorem. (*)
Supermassive ones are hypothesized to exist at the center of galaxies. These entities have event horizons
and emit Hawking radiation. For 10 points, name these massive objects from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black holes
Using the X-ray telescopes Suzaku and XMM-Newton, scientists in 2012 detected the quasiperiodic
oscillation associated with the increase in mass of one of these objects. Roy Kerr and Ted Newman solved
general relativity equations to describe the behavior of these objects when they have angular momentum. A
supermassive one at Sagittarius A is believed to be the center of the Milky Way galaxy. David Finkelstein
demonstrated mathematically that these are surrounded by a region that, to an outside observer, can never
be reached. The distance from the center of these objects to that region is named for Karl Schwarzschild,
and that region is called the event horizon. Name these objects which may emit Hawking radiation but
otherwise do not allow anything to escape, not even light.
ANSWER: black holes
Most X-ray binaries are thought to consist of one of these objects and an ordinary star. The Kerr metric is
used for the spinning ones of these, while the Schwarzschild metric describes the non-spinning, uncharged
ones. These objects, which usually form when gravitational force overcomes degeneracy pressure, can be
completely characterized by their mass, charge, and spin, according to the no-hair theorem. The cosmic
censorship hypothesis claims that these must always have event horizons to prevent their singularities from
being visible. For 10 points, name these objects from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: Black Holes
A method of removing energy from these objects was proposed by Roger Penrose because the Lense-
Thirring effect creates frame-dragging around the Kerr and Kerr-Newman, or rotating, type of
them. They only have three externally quantifiable properties according to the [*] no-hair theorem -
charge, mass, and angular momentum. For a certain mass, the Schwarzchild radius gives the event horizon
for one of these. Thought to evaporate via Hawking radiation, these are, for 10 points, what massive
celestial objects from which even light cannot escape?
ANSWER: black holes
Charged examples of these objects exhibit an internal boundary named for Cauchy and satisfy the Reissner-
Nordstrom metric. A photon sphere can occur near one of these, and the Penrose process seeks to extract
energy from their ergospheres. The Lense-Thirring effect describes the frame-dragging produced by a
rotating one of these objects subject to the no-hair theorem. Spontaneous pair production results in their
emission of Hawking radiation, and the Schwarzchild radius is the distance from the center at which the
event horizon occurs. Found at the center of galaxies, for 10 points, name these gravitational singularities
from which nothing can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
The geometry of the surroundings of these objects can be described by Flamm's paraboloid. Kruskal-
Szekeres coordinates are useful for doing calculations with them, and their surroundings exhibit extreme
frame-dragging. These objects cause the most dramatic examples of spaghettification, and all solutions to
the Einstein field equations for them can be characterized by mass, charge, and angular momentum
according to the no-hair theorem. These objects have collapsed within their Schwarzschild radius, at which
their escape velocity exceeds the speed of light. For 10 points, name these regions of spacetime, beyond
whose event horizons not even light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
The "fuzzball model" is thought to describe these objects, from which energy can be harvested by means of
the Penrose process. Ones described by the Kerr metric cause frame-dragging within their ergospheres.
Their only known properties are mass, charge, and angular momentum, due to the no-hair theorem. For a
given mass, the Schwarzschild radius gives the surface of their event horizons, which contain a singularity
of infinite density. Studied by Stephen Hawking, for 10 points, identify these massive, compact space
objects from which not even light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
These objects can have an internal boundary named for Cauchy, and they can also be extremal according to
the Reissner-Nordstrom metric. If the charge to mass ratio is any higher, they can violate the Cosmic
Censorship Hypothesis. Their entropy was conjectured to be inversely proportional to the Planck length
squared by Bekenstein, who sometimes names a process in which spontaneous pair production results in
them giving off energy, known as Hawking radiation. For 10 points, name these objects, which occur above
the Chandraseker limit, consisting of an event horizon surrounding a singularity, and which are so massive
that no light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes [accept singularities before "Planck length" is read]
According to Birkhoff's theorem, one form of these phenomena is the only vacuum solution that has
spherical symmetry, and these entities can be described using Penrose diagrams. The Reissner-Nordstrom
metric describes the charged variety of these entities, and they can be fully described by their mass, charge,
and angular momentum according to the no-hair theorem. The formula 2GM over the speed of light squared
describes the Schwarzschild radius for these entities. For 10 points, name these regions of spacetime from
which light is unable to escape past their event horizons.
ANSWER: Black Holes
The Reissner-Nordstrom solution to Einstein's equations describes one of these with charge, and the Kerr
solution describes a rotating one. The constant of proportionality for their entropy is k over 4 Planck
lengths, and is proportional to surface area. String theorists describe them as "fuzzballs", and they indirectly
cause the Lense-Thirring effect. "Mini" ones may have formed by the Big Bang, although they evaporate
through Hawking Radiation. They can be completely characterized by only mass, charge, and spin,
according to the no-hair theorem. Resulting from the collapse of a massive star, for 10 points, what
astronomic object is surrounded by event horizon and possesses a singularity, where gravity becomes
infinite?
ANSWER: Black hole
The Kerr solution to Einstein's field equation describes these entities which are rotating and the Reissner-
Nordstom solution to Einstein's field equations describes one of these with a charge. The no-hair theorem
states that the only externally observable parameters that can characterize these are: charge, mass and
angular momentum. It has been posited that a supermassive variety of these could lie in the center of
galaxies. For 10 points, name these entities which don-t allow anything, even light, to escape when it
crosses their event horizon.
ANSWER: black hole
The masses of these objects are related to velocity dispersion in the M-sigma relation, and their abrupt spin
flip may be a result of galaxy mergers. They can be described by a metric named for Kerr when they
possess angular momentum, and that metric allows angular momentum to be extracted in a process named
for Penrose. The simplest metric describing these objects gives a namesake radius equal to two G M over c
squared or two thirds of the radius of the photon sphere; that radius is named for Schwarzschild. They have
an event horizon. For 10 points, name these objects with a singularity in the center from which not even
light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
The trans-Planckian problem emerges when considering the wavelength of radiation emitted by these
entities. Charged examples of these entities exhibit a feature named for Cauchy and satisfy the
Reissner-Nordstrom metric, and one quantity relevant to them is equal to two times big G times mass
over speed of light squared. Those with (*) angular momentum display the Lense-Thirring effect inside
their ergospheres. These objects are formed at masses past the TOV limit, and are subject to the No-Hair
theorem. For 10 points, identify these supermassive objects, whose event horizons mark the point past
which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black holes
One of these objects that rotates is named for Roy Kerr. These objects have only three measurable
properties, mass, charge and angular momentum, according to the No Hair Theorem. These objects
are formed by stars above the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, and these objects were theorized
to emit blackbody radiation by Hawking. The Schwarzschild radius is defined as the distance from the
singularity at the center of one of these objects to its event horizon. For 10 points, name these deformations
in spacetime where gravity is so strong that not even light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
One string theory proposal treats them as fuzzballs and a proposed way of extracting energy from
them is the Penrose process. The Reissner-Nordstrom type have nonzero charge. The conjecture that
they can be completely described by charge, angular momentum, and mass is known as the no hair
theorem. One region of them is known as ergosphere, and they can be created by (*) compacting a
mass below its Schwarzschild radius. Information can not travel back past their event horizon, and at their
centers are singularities. For 10 points, name these objects from which no mass or light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes
A method to extract energy from a rotating one of these objects was proposed by Roger Penrose.
These objects are completely characterized by their mass, charge, and angular momentum according
to the no-hair theorem. They can be formed when a white dwarf exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit.
The radius of these objects is smaller than their (*) Schwarzschild radius. They emit Hawking radiation,
and supermassive ones are thought to lie at the center of galaxies. For 10 points, name these astronomical
bodies with an event horizon, past which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black hole
These objects are thought to provide power to blazars. The rotating versions of these bodies
described by the Kerr metric are surrounded by ergospheres from which energy can be gained in the
Penrose process, and they can be described by mass, charge, and angular momentum according to
the [*] no-hair theorem. They aren-t neutron stars, but after exploding in supernovae, stars that have
overcome the electron degeneracy pressure of the Chandrasekhar limit can form these objects. Featuring an
event horizon at the Schwarzchild radius surrounding a gravitational singularity, for 10 points, name these
astronomical objects so massive that no light can escape them.
ANSWER: black holes [prompt on "active galactic nuclei" until "rotating"]
These objects possess an ergosphere within which occurs the Lense-Thirring effect. The Reissner-
Nordstrom metric is used to describe non-rotating ones that possess electrical charge. Mass, electric charge,
and angular momentum are the only properties of these objects according to the No Hair Theorem, and
energy may be extracted from these via the Penrose Process. Pair production in one of these may result in
Hawking Radiation if it occurs near the event horizon. Formed when a supernova remnant exceeds the
Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, this is, for 10 points, what type of collapsed star that is named for its ability to
trap light?
ANSWER: black hole
The gravitational analog of Gauss's Law can be used to find the total mass inside one of these. The sonic
type of these occurs when phonons are trapped in a flowing fluid that exceeds the speed of sound, and it can
also be used to consider the trans-Planckian problem. The holographic principle can resolve the
information paradox regarding these entities. The Kerr-Newman metric describes one type of these, and the
no-hair theorem states that they are characterized by mass, charge, and angular momentum. Name these
objects, associated with Schwarzschild radii and event horizons, from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black holes
The Bekenstein formula gives the entropy associated with one of these objects, whose thermodynamic
processes inspired t'Hooft and Susskind to devise the holographic principle. Kruskal coordinates can be
used to bridge the boundary associated with one type of these objects, and the inability to see the inside of
one is known as the cosmic censorship hypothesis. These objects can only contain mass, angular
momentum, and charge according to the no-hair theorem. Energy can be extracted from a rotating one via
the Penrose process, and these objects can be described by the Reissner-Nordstrom or Kerr metrics, as well
as the Schwarzchild metric. Surrounded by a boundary from beyond which an outside observer can receive
no information, for ten points, identify these objects which may emit Hawking radiation and are believed to
contain singularities formed from the collapse of a whole bunch of mass.
ANSWER: black holes
A longstanding problem concerns whether or not these objects destroy information. A region
called the ergosphere surrounds these objects if they are rotating. These objects can evaporate by
emitting Hawking radiation. These objects are surrounded by a boundary called the (*) event
horizon. The centers of many galaxies are probably home to "supermassive" versions of these objects. For
10 points, name these astronomical objects so massive that nothing can escape their gravity.
ANSWER: black holes
The merger of two of these objects can be modeled by the Effective One-body formalism, which describes
the inspiral-plunge-ringdown model. No particle can remain at rest inside the stationary limit for rotating
versions of these objects, which are also surrounded by an ergosphere. The temperature of these objects is
related to the speed of light cubed over eight pi, while their entropy is proportional to their surface area.
These objects "evaporate" due to Hawking radiation. Sagittarius [A-Star] A* is the location of a
supermassive version of these objects, which are thought to exist at the center of every galaxy. For 10
points, name these objects from which light cannot escape.
ANSWER: black hole
The Lazarus method for simulating these events, partially based on the Teukolsky equation, was
succeeded in 2005 by a derivative of the BSSN method which treats the participants in these events as
mobile "punctures" on a grid. These events are followed by ringdown, in which oscillations are
exponentially damped with a quality factor of approximately the minus 0.45 power of one minus the
dimensionless spin parameter. It remains an open question whether these events can produce objects
that exceed the Kerr spin limit. The runup to these events is described by the post-Newtonian
approximation, in which a waveform of increasing frequency and amplitude can be observed; that
phase is called (*) inspiral. These events probably accompany galaxy mergers and are possibly the most
energetic events in the universe. For 10 points, name these theorized events that would be detected by the
gravitational waves they emit.
ANSWER: black hole mergers [or anything that refers to black holes colliding; prompt on anything about "producing gravitational waves"]
With Seigert, this man names a frequency shift that occurs during the Rabi oscillation, and another construct
named for this man employs the Fubini-Study metric and is used to model a two-level quantum system. A
phenomenon named for him is the product of a plane wave envelope function and a periodic function. In
addition to his namesake sphere, which is used to model qubits, and his namesake waves in crystalline
systems, his theorem is used to model an electron placed in a periodic potential. His walls separate magnetic
domains, and another set of equations named for him is used to model the relaxation time in a technique he
co-developed. For 10 points, name this physicist, who, with Purcell, developed NMR.
ANSWER: Felix Bloch
One theorem named for this man can be used to derive the Wannier functions by applying it to a single
band, then summing over the u sub k. One construct named for him is used to model two-level quantum
systems, usually qubits. In addition to his namesake sphere, another set of equations named for this man sets
the derivative of each component of M t equal to a term proportional to the gyromagnetic ratio plus a term
containing T1 and T2. The previous formula decomposes a wavefunction into an exponential term and a
periodic term, and applies to particles in a periodic potential. He also lends his name to the transition
regions between magnetic domains, his namesake "walls." For 10 points, name this physicist, who with
Purcell, developed NMR.
ANSWER: Felix Bloch
This color names a programming language which was used to teach object-oriented programming, though
development of the language was stopped after one of its developers began working on a successor to teach
Java. Lasers of this color became widely available to the public in 2010. Cobalt is used to make glass of
this color. In the Doppler Effect, the spectrum of a wave is said to be shifting towards this color if that
object is approaching the observer. A computer named after the "deep" shade of this color defeated Garry
Kasparov. Identify this color between indigo and green on the optical spectrum, the B in ROY G BIV.
ANSWER: blue
This adjective describes the cloud that lies below the "valley" and "sequence" of a galaxy
magnitude diagram. Stellar objects described by this adjective lie above the turnoff point of a
cluster's Hertzsprung-Russell diagram and are known as "stragglers." Examples of these kinds of
giants include the Beta Cepheids, Rigel and Bellatrix, which comprise the constellation Orion.
Typically, stars with this color can be found on the top left of the (*) HR Diagram. Thus, O class stars
are typically of this color. The stars with the highest temperature emit this color of light. Since the
Andromeda Galaxy is moving towards us, the Doppler Effect makes it appear to be more like this color.
For 10 points, name this color of Neptune.
ANSWER: blue
All SX Phoenicis variables belong to a class of stars described by this adjective, and S Doradus is the
prototype of another class of stars described by this adjective. In the spectra of active galactic nuclei,
a feature described with this adjective and "big" is caused by thermal emission from an accretion
disk. A cloud named for this adjective appears in a galaxy-color magnitude diagram and is mostly
populated by spirals. Eta carinae and P cygni are examples of a type of (*) "luminous variable"
described by this adjective, which also describes the supergiant Rigel. Along with ultraviolet and visible,
this color is found in the name of the most common photometric system. Class O stars appear this color, as
do a class of stars that lie to the left of the turnoff point of the main sequence. For 10 points, name this color
of a class of "stragglers" and the planet Neptune.
ANSWER: blue
Blazars sometimes exhibit it when expelling high-velocity jets of plasma. Barnard's Star notably also shows
it. While its opposite is nearly ubiquitous, this effect is measured only in about 100 galaxies, most of which
are gravitationally-bound dwarfs in the local group, and which include the Andromeda galaxy. It is so rare
because very few objects have enough motion to counteract the Hubble expansion of the universe. FTP,
name this shortening of the wavelength of light emitted by approaching objects, the opposite of the red shift.
ANSWER: blue shift
The magnetic dipole strength of a single electron is about one of a unit named for this man. Along with
Werner Heisenberg, this scientist developed the complementarity principle and the Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics. This scientist theorized that atoms emitted light in fixed wavelengths
because electrons in atoms only existed at certain energies. For 10 points, name this Danish physicist who
developed a model of the atom with quantized energy levels represented by concentric circles.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
A theorem saying that magnetic materials cannot be explained by classical physics, and thus magnetism
must be a quantum mechanical phenomenon, is named for him and van Leeuwen. One value named for him
is sometimes also named after Procopiu, and is equal to half the electron charge times h-bar divided by the
electron mass, while a distance of 0.53 angstroms is also named for him. He developed the idea that
quantum mechanics must agree with classical physics at the macroscopic level, and his namesake radius is
roughly the size of a hydrogen atom, while the magnetic moment of the electron is proportional to his
namesake magneton. FTP, name this man whose model says that electrons can only occupy certain energy
levels in an atom, a Danish physicist.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr (accept van Leeuwen before it's mentioned)
This scientist's namesake constant is calculated by dividing e times h by the quantity four pi times mass and
closely approximates the magnetic moment of a free electron, though it failed at its original purpose to
explain the Balmer series. The namesake of that constant, or magneton, said that quantum theory should
agree with classical theory when classical theory could be verified, and he also supported quantum
mechanics in debates with Albert Einstein. Name this man who proposed a planetary atomic model that only
worked for hydrogen, a Danish physicist.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
One set of quantization rules equating integrals to inter multiples of Planck's constant is named for this man
and Somerfeld. The magnetic dipole moment of an electron is expressed in terms of a constant called this
man's "magneton," and his namesake radius gives the position of an electron in an atom. This scientist
formulated the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, but he is better known for a model that
replaced the plum-pudding model and that of Rutherford. For 10 points, identify this Danish physicist
whose namesake atomic model features distinct energy levels of a hydrogen atom.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This man is the namesake of a constant, symbolized mu-sub-B, which serves as the unit of the electron
magnetic dipole moment. He believed that quantum mechanics described only probabilities and must be
explained in the terms of classical mechanics. This namesake of a "magneton" and formulator of the
complementarity principle was central to theorizing the Copenhagen interpretation and created a model that
explained the emission lines of hydrogen. For 10 points, identify this namesake of an orbit-based atomic
model who hailed from Denmark.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr [or Niels Henrik David Bohr]
This man names a unit which is approximately equal to the spin magnetic moment of the electron,
and he also developed the complementarity principle. The Rydberg formula is derived from one
model that this scientist proposed. That model solved the puzzle of spectral lines being unique for
different elements and was a modification of (*) Rutherford's model. For 10 points, name this Danish
physicist who names a model of the atom in which electrons travel in discrete orbits around the nucleus.
ANSWER: Neils Henrik David Bohr
The distance from a hydrogen atom nucleus that an electron is most likely to be found is known as this
man's namesake radius. This man posited that simultaneous wave-particle duality was impossible to observe
as part of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics he created with Heisenberg
(HIGH-zuhn-buhrg). This man's model of the atom modified that of Rutherford. For 10 points, name this
physicist who posited that atoms consist of negatively charged electrons that follow circular orbits around a
dense, positively charged nucleus.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
Along with Sommerfeld, he names a quantization theory in which systems must obey the "old quantum
condition", and this man's magneton is a unit for expressing an electron magnetic moment. One value
named for him is approximately equal to 0.53 angstroms, and is the radius of the orbit of the lowest-energy
electron in a certain atom, and he was one of the main figures behind the Copenhagen interpretation of
quantum mechanics, on behalf of which he debated Einstein. For ten points, name this physicist, whose
namesake model of the atom included electrons traveling in circular orbits around a nucleus and worked for
hydrogen.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
A quantity named for this scientist is equal to h-bar over the product of an electron's mass, the speed
of light, and the fine structure constant. That value is equal to about 53 picometers and is his
namesake radius. The magnetic dipole moment of an electron is this physicist's namesake
"magneton." This man gave a theoretical basis for Rydberg's formula in his best-known formulation,
which is co-named with (*) Rutherford. That model demonstrated that excited electrons could "jump"
between orbits but failed to account for orbitals. For ten points, name this Danish physicist who developed a
namesake model of the atom.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
With a German, this man names a method in which classical analysis is performed then an orbit
constrained to an integral number of de Broglie wavelengths to avoid destructive interference. One result of
this physicist, that was rediscovered by van Leeuwen, states that classical magnetism does not exist in
thermal equilibrium. With Wolfgang Pauli, this scientist developed the Aufbau principle. This man
introduced complementarity and proposed that angular momentum was quantized, allowing him to derive a
theoretical backing for the Rydberg Formula. For 10 points, name this originator, with Heisenberg, of the
Copenhagen interpretation whose model of the atom had electrons in quantized orbits.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
One quantity named for this scientist is defined as the distance between the electron and the electron
hole in an exciton. He's the first namesake of a formalism which sets the action equal to an integer
multiple of Planck's constant. The energy shift in the Zeeman effect is equal to the product of the
magnetic field, the z-component of the angular momentum, the g-factor, and another quantity named
for this man. Another quantity named for this man is the (*) most probable distance between the proton
and the electron in the ground state of a hydrogen atom. Those quantities are his namesake magneton and
radius. For 10 points, name this Danish scientist who postulated that electrons move around the nucleus in
quantized orbits in his namesake atomic model.
ANSWER: Niels Henrik David Bohr
This scientist and Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen discovered independently that classical physics could not
explain the spontaneous magnetization of iron. A conference he spoke at in Gottingen in 1922 became
known as his festival and was where he met his future student Werner Heisenberg. His interpretation of
quantum mechanics allowing mutually exclusive measurements was known as complementarity and became
known as the Copenhagen Interpretation. Name this physicist who explained energy levels using circular
orbits in his model of the hydrogen atom.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This man names a technique for determining discrete states along with Sommerfeld. He also developed
the complementarity principle. This scientist criticized the EPR paradox, and he engaged in a series of
debates with Einstein over the meaning of quantum theory. Along with Werner Heisenberg, this man
developed the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. For 10 points, name this Danish physicist
who developed a namesake model of the hydrogen atom.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
He created the correspondence principle, which states that quantum theory approximates classical
mechanics with large quantum numbers. He also helped formulate complementarily, which states both
particle and wave properties can be possessed, but only one can be observed at a time. His namesake
distance is approximately .53 angstroms, and it measures the most likely distance from the nucleus of a
Hydrogen atom to its electron. Part of the Manhattan project, he was a student of Rutherford and theorized
that the atom was made up of a nucleus with positive charge circled by electrons. FTP, name this Danish
physicist that names a magneton and a radius and believed atomic secrets should be shared with the world at
large.
ANSWER: Neils Bohr
Electron magnetic dipole moment is often measured in units of this scientist's namesake magneton. This
scientist formulated the correspondence principle and devised the idea of complementarity. Along with
Heisenberg, he helped develop the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. For 10 points, name
this Danish physicist whose model of the atom held that electrons travel in orbits around the nucleus.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This person developed a theorem, now named for him and Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen, stating that
magnetism cannot be explained by classical and statistical physics. He is also the namesake of a constant
equal to the magnitude of an electron's spin magnetic moment. Early quantum mechanics used models
named for Arnold Sommerfeld and this person, based on the idea that electrons have circular orbitals.
Werner Heisenberg and this person were associated with the idea that objects governed by quantum
mechanics create experimental results dependent on measurement, which was known as complementarity
and became known as the Copenhagen interpretation. Name this scientist known for his early quantum
model of a hydrogen atom.
ANSWER: Niels (Henrik David) Bohr
This scientist was the first to show that Uranium-235 was the only uranium isotope that could be used
for fission chain reactions. This developer of the complementarity principle also established that the
properties of atoms are primarily determined by their number of valence electrons. His most famous theory
details how electrons travel in orbits around the nucleus of an atom. Also the namesake of element 107, for
10 points, name this Danish physicist.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This scientist names a physical constant which is calculated as the product of the elementary charge and
h-bar divided by two times the mass of an electron; that is his magneton. This man developed the
complementarity principle, and he is the namesake of the smallest allowed orbital radius for an electron
within a hydrogen atom. For 10 points, identify this Danish physicist who posited that electrons orbit
around a nucleus in his quantum mechanical model of the atom.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This scientist wrote a paper titled "The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Development of Atomic Theory"
which introduced the principle of complementarity, and his name is used to name the constant which
approximates the spin magnetic moment of an electron. He attempted to explain the Rydberg formula by
improving Nagaoka's Saturnian model and Rutherford's planetary model. Unfortunately, his model gave
incorrect values for angular momentum and did not generalize well to atoms more complex than Hydrogen.
Identify this scientist associated with the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
One constant named after this scientist is the magnetic dipole moment of an electron, his namesake
magneton. His namesake ratio, approximately equal to 1/137, is also called the fine structure constant, and
is the ratio between the velocity of electrons orbiting a nucleus and the speed of light. His model of an atom
included a "liquid drop" of protons and neutrons in the nucleus, and replaced the Rutherford model. For 10
points, name this Danish physicist whose atomic model more importantly was the first to propose that
electrons were in shells orbiting the nucleus.
ANSWER: Niels Henrik David Bohr
This man developed a principle which states that a complete knowledge of phenomena at the
atomic scale requires a description of both wave and particle properties; that is his complementarity
principle. One model developed by this scientist successfully explained the emission spectrum of (*)
hydrogen that was fit by the Rydberg formula. For 10 points, identify this Danish physicist whose model of
the atom depicts it as a small positively charged nucleus surrounded by electrons traveling in circular
orbits.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
The potential energy associated with the Zeeman effect is proportional to the Lande g-factor, one
component of momentum, and a quantity name for this man. That quantity named for this man is
equal to the magnetic dipole moment of an orbiting electron in the ground state. He is the namesake
of a constant equal to the most probable distance between the proton and electron in a certain
system, his namesake radius. While studying predictions of a model named for this man, (*)
Sommerfeld introduced the fine structure constant. This man developed a model which he used to derive the
Rydberg formula for the spectral lines of hydrogen. For 10 points, name this Danish physicist whose
namesake model of the hydrogen atom only allowed electrons to orbit at a discrete set of distances from the
nucleus.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This scientist names a unit that is charge times h bar over two times rest mass; that is the magnetic
moment of an electron due to spin and is named his magneton. One problem with a model this man
proposed is that moving charges would (*) radiate away too much power. In a hydrogen atom, the
maximum of the magnitude of an electron's wave function occurs at this man's namesake radius. For 10
points, name this Danish physicist who names a model of atoms in which electrons travel around the
nucleus in distinct circular orbits.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This man's father names the cooperativity of oxygen binding to hemoglobin, and electron magnetic dipole
moments are measured in units of this man's namesake magneton. This man's correspondence principle
states that the results of quantum mechanics must approach those of classical mechanics in sufficiently large
calculations, and 0.53 angstroms is the length of his namesake (*) radius, the most likely distance between
the hydrogen nucleus and its electron. Helping to formulate the Copenhagen interpretation, for ten points,
name this Danish physicist who posited than electrons travel in circular orbits around a dense nucleus.
ANSWER: Niehls Henrik David Bohr
One quantity named for him is equal to h-bar times the charge of an electron divided by two times
the mass of an electron. Another quantity named for him times three halves is the expectation value for
the distance of an electron from the nucleus. That quantity is approximately equal to 0.529 angstroms
and is known as his namesake radius. His most famous contribution arose from his assumption that the
angular momentum of electrons is quantized. For 10 points, identify this Danish scientist best known for
his namesake model of the hydrogen atom.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr
This man's brother is the namesake of a compactification that associates a Hausdorff topological
group H with G, and also names a theory that characterizes the gamma function with Mollerup. He
names the last theory of the so-called "Old Quantum" school along with Kramers and Slater. He
names the units that express electron magnetic dipole moment, and the lowest-energy orbital for an
electron is known as his "radius." With Werner Heisenberg he formulated the Copenhagen interpretation,
which he defended in a series of debates with Einstein. For 10 points, name this scientist whose namesake
model of the atom worked for hydrogen, a noted Dane.
ANSWER: Niels Henrik David Bohr
The distance between a hydrogen nucleus and its ground-state electron is called this man's "radius".
He explained Balmer's spectral lines by positing a model in which energy emitted is proportional to
the inverse of an integer (*) n squared, and in which electrons orbit the nucleus in quantized distances. For
10 points, name this scientist who developed a quantized planetary model of the atom, and who was from
Denmark.
ANSWER: Niels Bohr (accept Bohr radius)
This man names a method of determining the allowed quantized states of a system with Sommerfeld. He
criticized the EPR paradox as part of his debates on quantum mechanics with Albert Einstein, and the waveparticle duality is an example of this man's complementarity principle. The Rydberg formula was derived
from one of his theories, and he codified his work on quantum mechanics with Werner Heisenberg in the
Copenhagen interpretation. For 10 points, name this Danish scientist who names a model of the atom in
which electrons travel in orbits that are fixed distances from the nucleus.
ANSWER: Niels Henrik David Bohr
This model erroneously predicts a nonzero angular momentum in the ground state. Elliptical
orbits were incorporated into this model by Arnold Sommerfeld. This model yielded -13.6 electron
volts as the ground state. The key achievement of this model was its successful explanation of the (*)
Rydberg formula. This model is a quantum mechanical modification of the Rutherford model, with the
orbits of electrons quantized. For 10 points, name this model of the atom named for a Dutch physicist.
ANSWER: Rutherford-Bohr model of the hydrogen atom
A paradox named for this man uses the anthropic principle in considering the existence of self-aware beings
as part of rare fluctuations from states of chaos. A relation named for this man gives the ratio of number
density between two locations in a plasma as the exponential of a value proportional to the difference in the
potentials at each location. This man derived a theorem that provoked the argument that an irreversible
process cannot be deduced from time-symmetric dynamics, an argument called Loschmidt's paradox. This
deviser of the H-theorem defined the entropy of a system as the logarithm of the number of microstates
multiplied by a constant equal to the gas constant divided by Avogadro's number. For 10 points, name this
suicidal physicist whose namesake constant is symbolized k-sub-B.
ANSWER: Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann
Vlasov's equation is a special case of an equation named after this man in which collisions are
neglected, while another equation named after this man describes "almost rigid motion." An equation
inscribed on his tombstone reads "S = k log W", where k is his namesake constant. A law stating that the
energy radiated by a black body is proportional to the fourth power of temperature is named for Stefan
and this man. For 10 points, name this Austrian scientist, one of the founders of statistical mechanics.
ANSWER: Ludwig Boltzmann
One theorem developed by this man assumes that the velocities of colliding particles are uncorrelated,
which he called the Stosszahlansatz. The equation L-hat of f equals C of f, where L-hat is the Liouville
operator and C is the collision operator, is the Hamiltonian form of this man's eponymous transport
equation. Loschmidt's paradox was proposed in response to the H-theorem of this physicist who also
introduced the ergodic hypothesis. When the energy of each particle is simply the kinetic energy of the
particle, the resulting distribution is co-named for this man and Maxwell. For 10 points, name this physicist
credited with the introduction of statistical mechanics, whose namesake constant is denoted k-sub-B.
ANSWER: Ludwig Boltzmann
This man names an equation whose lattice method can be used to solve the Navier-Stokes equation and
which is used to find the distribution function of a fluid. The fraction of particles at a specific temperature
is given as inversely proportional to the partition function by a distribution named for this man, and with
Maxwell he names a distribution of molecular velocities in a gas. He discovered that a system's entropy
can be given by the natural logarithm of the number of microstates times his namesake constant, equal to the
gas constant over Avogadro's number. For 10 points, identify this physicist who names a law governing
blackbody radiation with Stefan.
ANSWER: Ludwig Boltzmann
One equation named for this man uses the Stosszahl Ansatz for the collision term and can be used to
describe the thermalization of the CMB due to Compton scattering; that equation is also known as
the radiative transport equation. The BGK collision operator is used with a lattice model named for
this man to solve the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. This man co-names a (*) distribution
function for energy between identical but distinguishable particles along with the namesake of four
equations characterizing the electromagnetic force, Maxwell, and also co-names a radiation law with T to
the fourth dependence. For 10 points, identify this man who names a law governing blackbody radiation
with Stefan.
ANSWER: Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann
This constant is used in simple gas thermodynamics to find the pressure of a gas, by dividing volume by the
product of the number of molecules of gas, the temperature, and it. The average energy per degree of
freedom equals one-half the product of this constant with the temperature of a substance. Entropy can be
defined as this constant multiplied by the natural logarithm of the number of microstates consistent with the
given macrostate. Identify this constant utilized in thermodynamics, commonly denoted k-sub-B and named
after an Austrian physicist crucial in developing the field of statistical thermodynamics.
ANSWER: Boltzmann constant [accept k-sub-B before it is mentioned; prompt on k]
This person is the namesake of an iterative scheme wherein the Schrodinger equation is converted to
an integral equation with the potential volume integral considered as an inhomogeneous term. The
free-particle wave function is then the zeroth approximate wave function named for this man; the nth
is given by inserting the n minus first into the potential integral and solving. This scientist is the first
namesake of another scheme that is valid when the nth adiabatic surface is well bounded by the n
plus first. The nth adiabatic surface is the energy of the nth (*) electronic state with the nuclear position
as parameter; namely, it is the electronic eigenenergy calculated by the aforementioned scheme. FTP, name
this quantum physicist who interpreted the square modulus of the wavefunction as a probability density for
finding a particle and who names a cycle for calculating lattice energy along with Haber and an
approximation with J. Robert Oppenheimer, the grandfather of Olivia Newton John.
ANSWER: Max Born [accept Born approximation or Born-Oppenheimer approximation or Born interpretation]
The internuclear and interelectronic repulsions in an ionic lattice are named after this man, and
those forces, when paired with the Coulombic energy in terms of Madelung constants, can be used to
find the lattice energy via an equation name for him and Lande. Interparticle distance is preserved in
inertial frames of a moving object in his namesake rigidity, and this man interpreted (*) probability as
the square of the wave function. With a student, he names the idea that nuclear motion can be neglected due
to large relative nuclear mass in the Schrodinger equation. For 10 points, name this German physicist who
lends his name to a doubly eponymous approximation with Oppenheimer.
ANSWER: Max Born
A modification of this procedure adds a position term for the center of mass and requires placing the whole
system in a potential sphere in order to use the particle in a box method; that procedure is partially named
for Huang. The energy calculated in this procedure is a lower bound on the total energy, and the first step of
this procedure finds the energy eigenvalue in terms of the position vector R, creating a potential energy
surface. A simple application of it is to find the molecular orbitals of an H-two-plus atom, and its second
step involves removing the off-diagonal kinetic energy terms, which creates a set of uncoupled motion
equations. It states that the one particle only sees the Coloumb potential of another, which removes several
terms from an otherwise hairy partial differential equation. For 10 points, name this method which says that
nuclear motion can be ignored when modeling a molecule, named for two guys.
ANSWER: Born-Oppenheimer approximation
Along with Saha, he sometimes lends his name to an equation of state which fits well for densities
below 0.8 times the critical density, and the quantum mechanical form of an ideal gas is named for
him. A Tonks-Girardeau gas is an example of a phase where particles named for him exhibit
repulsion along one dimension, and he lends his name to a statistical distribution which is used to
model particles with integer spin along with Albert Einstein. For 10 points, identify this Indian physicist,
whose namesake particles mediate the fundamental forces of nature, and are exemplified by photons,
gluons, and W and Z particles.
ANSWER: Satyendranath Nath Bose
Lene Hau has created substances of this type wherein the speed of light is zero, while a variety
dominated by repulsive forces in one dimension is named for Tonks and Girardeau. Their
Hamiltonians contain a term proportional to particle density, resulting in the nonlinear (*) Gross-
Pitaevskii equation. The first example of one of these substances was produced using laser cooling on
rubidium by Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman. For 10 points, identify this state of matter in which particles
collapse into the lowest quantum state on a macroscopic scale, named for an Indian and a German physicist.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensate
The transition temperature of these systems is proportional to the particle density divided by the Riemann
zeta function, all to the two-thirds power. Vortices in them are allowed via the psi-squared term in the
equation describing the wavefunction of these systems. Sweeping a magnetic field through one of these
causes spin-flip collisions and the Feschbach resonance, while further increasing the field causes an
implosion followed by an explosion in a namesake type of nova. Their wavefunction is described by the
Gross-Pitaevskii equation. They were first created by Cornell, Wieman, and Ketterle by laser-cooling a
bunch of rubidium atoms. For 10 points, name this system consisting of a bunch of degenerate ultracold
bosons.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensates [or BECs]
The wavefunction of this type of system can be approximated by modifying the Schrodinger Equation to
account for the "coupling" interactions among the system's constituent particles, a method formulated by
Gross and Pitaevskii. Its creation was first confirmed by the observation of a distinctive peak in the
velocity-distribution graph of a gas of rubidium atoms cooled to 170 nanokelvin with the use of lasers and
evaporative cooling. That discovery, made in 1995 by Carl Wieman and Eric Cornell at the University of
Colorado-Boulder, earned them the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics, which they shared with Wolfgang Ketterle
of MIT. FTP, name this doubly-eponymous state of matter observed near absolute zero in which distinct
particles of integer spin "condense" to the same quantum state.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensate
The critical kinetic temperature in these systems is about three times h-bar squared times number
density to the two-thirds, divided by the particle mass; that value is obtained by integrating the underlying
particle distribution function maximum over wavevectors. A semi-classical model of these systems has
each additional particle adding the ground state energy, so the Hamiltonian of these systems includes a term
of the ground state potential times the square modulus of the wave function, as can be seen in the
Gross-Piatevskii equation. That equation gives their ground state wave functions. Lasers can be used to
create soliton trains in these materials, which may allow for the creation of extremely precise gyroscopes.
They were first successfully created using rubidium in 1995 by Cornell and Wieman. For 10 points, name
these compact, degenerate states formed near absolute zero from particles with integer spins.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensates [or BECs; prompt on condensates]
Their behavior is described by an equation that adds a coupling constant based on scattering lengths
to the Schrodinger equation, known as the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. They can implode if their
wavefunctions are made to be attractive, and they can spontaneously flow out of containers as well as
greatly slow a beam of light. One of their namesakes first proposed the idea but could not get his work
published until the other namesake saw it. For 10 points, name this state of matter named for an Indian and
a German who also name the statistics that govern their particles.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensates
One method of producing these substances uses the collision of coupled fermions, causing a significant
increase in scattering length; that method is called Feshbach resonance. One recent example of these
substances is the Tonks-Girardeau gas, and it shares many properties with the product of lambda transition
in helium-four, including superfluidity. Wolfgang Ketterle made the first appreciable quantities of this
substance using sodium, though the very first example was created by Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman in
1995 using rubidium. All of these substances- particles are in the ground state, an effect usually produced
by laser cooling, which causes individual atoms to coalesce into a "super atom". Often considered the fifth
state of matter, name this substance that forms when a dilute gas approaches absolute zero.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensates [or BECs]
The particle density divided by the Riemann zeta function all raised to the two-thirds power is proportional
to the transition temperature of these systems. The nonlinear equation modeling their behavior has the form
of the Schrodinger equation with the addition of an interaction term and is known as the Gross-Pitaevskii
equation.A type of this substance in which the particles are confined to one dimension is named after Tonks
and Girardeau, and this supercooled state of matter was first synthesized by Cornell and Wieman in
rubidium atoms. For 10 points, identify this doubly-eponymous "fifth state of matter."
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein Condensates [or BECs]
Field-induced Neel ordering with magnons in antiferromagnets is an example of this. The wave function of
this can be described by an equation that adds a term based on the scattering length and the Dirac delta
function to the Schrodinger equation; that equation is named for Gross and Pitaevskii. The superfluidity of
He-4 was eventually determined to be caused by this substance being dispersed in the liquid, and the one
created by Wolfgang Ketterle had about a hundred times more atoms than the first one created. Eric Cornell
and Carl Wieman won the 2001 Nobel Prize for the discovery of, for ten points, this state of matter, the
namesake of an Indian and a German physicist.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensate [accept BEC]
The Tonks-Girardeau gas arises from a one-dimensional restriction of the mechanics of these objects, and
they may implode if attractive interactions overwhelm their confining potential. One model, describing them
utilizes the Hartree-Fock approximation and is called the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. Ketterle et al used
sodium-23 to observe quantum mechanical interference between two of these, and Cornell and Wieman
created the first pure one of them in 1995 using a gas of rubidium atoms. For ten points, name this state of
matter named for an Indian and a German, an extremely cold dilute gas of certain particles.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensates (Accept BECs.)
Nikuni et al. created a version of these using a group of magnons in an antiferromagnet. Sweeping a
magnetic field through them creates a condition in which their particles- degree of freedom couples with
their reaction coordinate, creating a Feschbach resonance. Tonks and Girardeau lend their name to a twodimensional version of this substance, whose wavefunctions are given by the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. The
first one was created by Cornell and Weimann by supercooling a group of rubidium atoms, causing them to
collapse into a single quantum state. FTP, name this state of matter named for two scientists, in which a
group of bosons gel together.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein Condensate
Sapiro, Zhang, and Raithel used a one-dimensional optical lattice to demonstrate the transition of this
substance from a superfluid to a Mott-insulator. Ramsey fringes appear in these substances when one
applies a series of pulses from the excitation field. When confined to one dimension, the equivalent of this
substance is called a Tonks-Girardeau gas, while Ketterle was able to create it in dilute gases. Modelled by
the Gross-Pitaevskii equation, this substance is typically created by cooling rubidium atoms, after which
they collapse into the same quantum state as discovered by Cornell and Weimann. FTP, name this state of
matter in which bosons are brought near absolute zero, named after two scientists.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein Condensate
This state was predicted by a set of quantum mechanical statistics that differs from Fermi-Dirac
statistics. This state is created by taking a collection of particles with integer spin and forcing them to
occupy the lowest energy level. The first one was created by Cornell and Wieman, who used Doppler
cooling on a collection of rubidium atoms. for 10 points, name this ultra-cold state of degenerate matter
named for two physicists.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensates [or BECs]
Dark solitons may be generated in one-dimensional versions of these entities, in which quantum vortices
may be created if they are stirred with a laser. These entities can be observed through Feschbach resonance
and examples of these entities include the Tonks-Giardeau gas. One method of analyzing these entities can
be referred to as the non-linear Schrodinger equation and is known as the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. The
first "pure" one of these entities was created by Cornell and Wiemann. For 10 points, identify these objects,
which may be referred to as the "fifth state of matter," named after an Indian and a German scientist.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensate [or BEC]
Its creation and annihilation operators can be replaced by their expectation values according to the
Bogoliubov approximation. The Thomas-Fermi approximation ignores the kinetic energy operator in
the (*) Gross-Pitaevskii equation, which describes its zero-temperature properties. It involves the formation
of a shared low energy quantum state of integer spin particles and was first observed in gaseous rubidium
atoms. For 10 points, name this substance in which particles coalesce into a single quantum mechanical
entity.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensate (or BEC)
The Gross-Pitaevskii equation is used to model it, and in a 2002 Science paper, semiconductor quantum
wells were used to study it in exciton-polaritons. Observing the second-order coherence properties can give
optical evidence of it, and when placed in an optical lattice, it can show a superfluid to Mott-insulator phase
transition. Electro-magnetically induced transparency, atom lasing, and ultra-slow light have been observed
in it, and in the first demonstration of it, rubidium atoms were loaded in a magneto-optical trap and laser
cooled to just above absolute zero. For 10 points, identify this distinct form of matter, named for an Indian
and a German physicist.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensate [prompt on BEC]
This is a generalized form of the Tonks-Girardeau gas. Feschbach Resonances can be found in this
gas that is at the center of the Thomas-Fermi Equation, a case of the Gross-Pitaevski Equation.
Sometimes formed using rubidium, Cornell and Wiemann first synthesized this double-eponymous
material. For ten points, name this state of matter cooled to extremely low temperatures, named for an
Indian and German Scientist.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein Condensate
In a mean field approximation of dilute forms of this substance, the healing length gives the minimum
length that the order parameter must go to 0 at boundary. In the thermodynamic limit, this
substance cannot be created in a 1D harmonic trap. A similar substance can be made through
Cooper pairs. The critical temperature for the existence of this is defined as the point where the
excited states have macroscopic numbers of particles. Below that temperature, the ground state
begins to have macroscopic numbers of particles, leading to the formation of this. The approximate
behavior of it is shown via the (*) Gross-Pitaevskii equation and it was first created in 1995 with
rubidium-57 at very low temperatures. For 10 points, name this substance named for two scientists who also
name a statistical distribution contrasting with the Fermi-Dirac distribution that describes bosons.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein condensate [accept BEC; prompt on partial answers]
The creation of this type of substance generally starts by putting atoms in a magneto-optical trap,
immediately followed by an evaporative method. In attempting the first synthesis of this type of substance,
Wolfgang Ketterle worked with sodium atoms, while contemporaneously Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman
succeeded with rubidium atoms. Atoms in this type of substance are all at the lowest quantum level. For 10
points, name this "fifth state of matter" in which atoms are brought very close to absolute zero in a
substance named after a German and an Indian physicist.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein Condensate [or BEC]
The derivation of this physical description makes an approximation by taking the product over i of the
factorial of n sub i plus g sub i over n sub i factorial times g sub i factorial. This framework includes a
constant with an inverse that is approximated by a function whose maximum is at the zeta function of 3 over
2. This descriptions derivation can thought of as examining the ways of arranging circles and barriers in a
straight line. This description is written mathematically as n sub i equals g sub i over negative one plus b
times e to the e sub I over kt. This is symmetric with the interchange of any two objects and this describes
indistinguishable particles. This distribution allows for many particles to occupy the same state. For 10
points, name this distribution of particles like photons that have integer spin.
ANSWER: Bose-Einstein distribution [or Bose-Einstein statistics]
These particles- creation and annihilation operators are linked to spin operators via the Holstein-
Primakoff transformation. The commutator of the creation operator for these particles is equal to the
Kronecker delta of the states that the operator is acting on. The degeneracy divided by an
exponential minus 1 gives the expected number of these particles in a given state, in contrast with
their (*) counterparts which have a plus one in the denominator. A collection of these particles will all
collapse to the ground state at a low enough temperature, resulting in a new highly-degenerate form of
matter. These particles include the carriers of the weak force, W and Z, as well as a particle whose
associated field's symmetry breaking imparts mass. For 10 points, name these particles which have integer
spin, as opposed to fermions.
ANSWER: boson
The superfluidity of helium-4 and the properties of masers and lasers are consequences of statistics of these
particles. Although most of them are composite particles, elementary forms of them exist as well, such as
photons, Z and W particles, and gluons. Together with fermions they constitute all of the composite and
elementary particles that are known, but unlike fermions they have an integer spin. The Large Hadron
Collider in Cern was built to test for the existence of their Higgs variety. FTP, name these force-carrying
particles which were named after Satyendra Nath Bose.
ANSWER: boson(s)
The wavefunctions of these particles exhibit symmetry under interchange. The probability that these
particles will have a given energy is one over the quantity of an exponential function minus one. The
statistics that governs these particles are named for Einstein and the particles- namesake. Because
they do not follow the Pauli exclusion principle, these particles can share the same energy level,
forming a "condensate". Examples of these particles include the force carriers, which are the gauge
types, and the Higgs particle. Name these particles that have integer number spin numbers, in
contrast with fermions.
ANSWER: bosons
Composite examples, including pions and kaons, have a baryon number of 0, consist of an equal number of
quarks and antiquarks, and are called mesons. They obey a set of statistics developed by their namesake
and Einstein. Members of one class of these particles act as carriers of the fundamental forces and include
photons, gluons, gravitons, W, and Z particles. Another type which has yet to be observed is sometimes
referred to as the "god particle," because it is theorized to give mass to every object in the universe, and is
named after Peter Higgs. FTP, name this class of particles having an integral spin and named for an Indian
physicist.
ANSWER: Boson
One way of estimating the size of one of these structures is by integrating the momentum thickness across
the exit plane, a formalism appropriately known as the momentum-integral technique. In the case of an
adverse pressure gradient, but not in the case of a favorable pressure gradient, momentum loss results in the
decoupling of this structure from the immersed body beyond the separation point. For laminar flow past a
plate, the velocity profile is a function of a single dimensionless variable, which allows the thickness of this
structure to be given by five over the square root of the Reynolds number according to the Blasius formula.
The outer edge of this region is often defined as the point where the flow velocity is equal to 99% of the
free stream flow velocity. For 10 points, name this structure that represents the region of a flow where
viscous diffusion is important and which are divided into laminar and turbulent types.
ANSWER: boundary layer
A phenomenon that follows this law has a finite line width named for Darwin. Departures from ideality of
this law can be shown on a rocking curve. This law can be illustrated using the Ewald sphere of reflection
construction. This law is a special case of the Laue equations. This law can be used to characterize materials
with the powder method. Diffuse scattering does not follow this law. This law can be used to derive the
distance between similar atomic planes in a lattice, the so-called d-spacing. This law states that an integer
times wavelength is equal to two times interplanar spacing times the sine of the incident beam angle, or n
lambda equals two d sine theta. For 10 points, identify this law of X-ray diffraction in crystals.
ANSWER: Bragg's law [prompt on von Laue equations before it is read]
This law is used to determine the position of the sample in the WDS technique, which measures
trace elements. The phenomenon described by this law breaks down at the Henderson limit. This law
is used to determine allowed reflections using the definitions of the h, k, and l planes. One method of
deriving it involves setting delta-k equal to G from the von Laue equations, then applying the
properties of the reciprocal (*) space. A 54 volt peak confirmed that this law applies to electrons in the
Davisson-Germer experiment when using the de Broglie wavelength. This law states that two d times the
sine of theta equals n times the wavelength. For 10 points, name this law which gives the angles at which
scattered X-rays from a crystal interfere constructively.
ANSWER: Bragg's Law
Suppressed by the Landau-Pomeranchuk-Migdal effect, its non-relativistic type's spectral radiation can be
computed by Larmor's formula. This mechanism is the principal method of power loss during a fusion
reaction and the Gaunt factor is needed in calculations involving the thermal type of this radiation. It is
characterized by a minimum wavelength cutoff, where the total kinetic energy of the invading particle
vanishes. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which x-rays are emitted due to rapid deceleration of
electrons traveling through ions, with a German name meaning "braking radiation."
ANSWER: bremsstrahlung
Chapter 10 of this work references the 100,004th Congress of Alpha Centauri and Marty McFly from the
Back to the Future Series. The foreword in later editions states that one copy had been sold for every 750
people in the world. The author makes the recommendation "if you meet your antiself, don-t shake hands!
You would both vanish in a great flash of light" in the fifth chapter entitled "Elementary Particles and the
Forces of Nature". For 10 points, name this nonfiction work about astrophysics-made-simple by Stephen
Hawking.
ANSWER: A Brief History of Time
The first one of these objects known to emit radio waves is LP 944-20. A test for these objects was
developed by Rebolo, Martin, and Magazzu, and the theoretical existence of these objects was predicted by
Shiv Kumar. One type of them has a spectrum featuring iron hydride and chromium hydride bands, and they
can be split into spectral types called T and L, and some of them contain methane. The best known of these
objects may be Gliese 229, and they are often identified by the presence of lithium in their spectra. FTP,
name these celestial objects that are not massive enough to achieve temperatures necessary for the fusion of
hydrogen, which are less than a tenth of the sun's mass and are known as "failed stars."
ANSWER: Brown dwarf
Rebolo, Martin, and Magazzu proposed one test to distinguish between these objects and their larger
counterparts, and many of these objects were discovered by the 2MASS and DENIS surveys. Teide 1
was the first of these to be verified, while the first to be discovered was Gliese 229B. They can be
identified by the presence of a certain (*) element, as these objects retain lithium almost indefinitely.
They include spectral types L, T, and R, and have an upper limit of about 75 Jupiter masses. For 10 points,
name these failed stars which lack the mass to sustain hydrogen fusion and are thus much less luminous as
white or red dwarf stars.
ANSWER: brown dwarfs [accept sub-stellar objects before "For 10 points;" prompt afterward]
There are two known planets that orbit this kind of object, but a third is suspected to explain why the one is
extremely hot, likely due to a recent collision. Over long periods of time, their atmospheres can accumulate
methane, but like more massive objects, their atmosphere is fully convective. They fall into "L" and "T"
spectral classes. A sure test for these is the presence of lithium, since stars begin to fuse lithium when they
are at most one hundred million years old. A subclass of planetars, along with interstellar stars, FTP,
identify these almost-stars too small to sustain hydrogen fusion.
ANSWER: brown dwarfs
These astronomical objects become electrically neutral when their surface temperatures fall below
2500 degrees Celsius and their upper atmospheres cease to exist. An abundance of lithium is present
in the "L" spectral class of these objects. Young examples of these objects will glow because of
gravitational contraction, the only way scientists have of observing them. These objects are a
candidate for the (*) link between gas giants like Jupiter and low-mass stars. For ten points, name these
"failed stars" which cannot sustain nuclear fusion reactions, distinguishing them from red dwarfs.
ANSWER: brown dwarf
This type of object was the subject of the thesis of Jill Tarter, who coined the name. One major
project of the WISE satellite is searching for these objects, whose namesake "desert" refers to their
absence in relatively tight binaries. One of the diagnostic tests for them is emission lines of (*)
lithium, and their T class, which shows absorption bands due to methane, is exemplified by the first known
one of these objects, Gliese 229B. They are fully convective and typically exhibit a brief deuterium fusion
phase, but do not enter the main sequence due to their inability to ignite hydrogen. For 10 points, name
these small objects sometimes described as "failed stars."
ANSWER: brown dwarves
In 1999, the Chandra X-Ray observatory captured a flare from LP 944-20, one of these objects. Notable
examples of this type of object include 2M1207, which has a planetary mass in orbit around it, and the
smallest known one is found in the constellation Chamaeleon. These objects fall into spectral classes L and
T and are hypothesized to also include the newly created spectral class Y. Often distinguished from objects
of similar mass using the lithium test, the first one of them to be confirmed was Gliese 229B, while Richard
Muller hypothesized that one of these named Nemesis orbits the sun and disrupts the Oort Cloud. Lying to
the lower right of the main sequence on the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, for 10 points, name this dimmest
and least massive variety of star which lacks the core temperature to initiate thermonuclear reactions.
ANSWER: brown dwarfs
Michel Mayor used astrometric data provided by Hipparcos in conjunction with the radial velocity method
to investigate ten candidates for them. S Ori 47 has the lowest mass of any known one of these and they
release substantial amounts of infrared radiation. Known to fuse deuterium on a small scale, their name was
coined by Jill Tarter and Gliese 229B was the first one to be confirmed. The maximum mass of one of these
is believed to be approximately 84 times the mass of Jupiter, or the largest mass that is insufficient for
normal hydrogen fusion. For 10 points, name this dimmest and least massive star, sometimes referred to as a
"failed star."
ANSWER: brown dwarf
Two of these stellar objects are located in the Epsilon Indi system. One type of these objects have 1.7 and
2.2 micrometer methane signatures in their spectra, while one important test for them is the presence of the
indication of lithium in their spectra. One example of this type of star is Gliese 229 B. They include cooler
members of the L spectral class and all objects in the T class. For 10 points, name these substellar objects
that are less than 0.08 solar masses and are not hot enough to start thermonuclear reactions.
ANSWER: brown dwarf
Many of these objects are expected to be detected by NASA's WISE infrared space telescope. Gliese 229B
was determined to be one of these objects through the detection of methane in its atmosphere, but a more
common method to detect these objects is the lithium test. The spectral classes T, L, and Y were created in
order to classify these objects, which appear on the absolute bottom right of the HR diagram. A fringe
theory posits that one of these objects sends objects from the Oort cloud into the inner Solar System, which
in turn causes mass extinctions on Earth; that one is the alleged twin star of the Sun called Nemesis. For 10
points, identify these low mass "failed stars," which are not massive enough to fuse hydrogen in their cores.
ANSWER: brown dwarfs
This adjective describes a construct, developed by Hanggi and others, which drives directed motion
in the presence of thermal noise on the nano-scale. A theoretical device described by this adjective
consists of a paddle wheel connected to a gear which can only rotate in one direction because of a
pawl. That device, which is in apparent violation of the second (*) law of thermodynamics, is also
known as a Feynman-Smoluchowski device. This adjective also describes a process which can be
mathematically modeled as a Levy process. That process was used to calculate Avogadro's constant by Jean
Baptiste Perrin, and it is modeled by the Weiner process. For 10 points, name this adjective derived from
the name of a Scottish botanist, which names a type of motion studied by Einstein.
ANSWER: Brownian
Debye extended an equation describing this phenomenon to describe dielectric relaxation, and this
process can be modeled by a set of integrals named for Ito. The most common equation to describe it
was developed by Pierre Langevin, and Jean Baptiste Perrin used this to approximate Avogadro's
number. One explanation of this process involved the kinetic theory of gases, and its namesake first
observed the phenomenon in a microscope slide containing water and pollen grains. For 10 points, name
this process studied by Einstein, the random motion of particles in a fluid, named for a Scottish scientist.
ANSWER: Brownian Motion
This process powers the perpetual motion machine known as Feynman's ratchet. Langevin derived
his namesake equation to model this process. This process is also known as the Weiner process. Jean
Perrin confirmed the atomic nature of matter and derived Avogadro's number in his studies of this
process. Those studies also verified the stochastic model of this process described in one of Einstein's
Annus Mirabilis papers. It was discovered when its namesake observed (*) pollen grains suspended in
water. For 10 points, name this random movement of particles suspended in a fluid.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
The partial derivative with respect to time of the density of particles experiencing this phenomenon is
related to the mass diffusivity times the second partial derivative of their density with respect to x. The
time-evolution of this phenomenon is well described by the Langevin equation. The random walk paradigm
is used to model this phenomenon, whose description, along with that of Special Relativity and the
photoelectric effect, made up Einstein's annus mirabilis papers. This phenomenon occurs to particles
suspend in a fluid that are hit by that fluid's particles. 10 points, pollen randomly moving across water is an
example of what type of motion?
ANSWER: Brownian motion
One equation used to describe this process states that m a is equal to F x minus beta times the velocity
vector plus eta of t. Levy stated that a process X is one of these if it is its own natural filtration and if X sub
I times X sub J minus Kronecker sub ij times t for all I and J is a martingale. This physical process is the
classical example of a Wiener process, and Feynman developed a thought experiment that uses a ratchet to
derive work from this process. This process is described by the Langevin equation, while it is used to
predict the size of molecules based on one of Einstein's Annus Mirabilis papers. It was first observed by its
namesake via pollen grains in water. For 10 points, name this random movement of particles in a fluid.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
This process follows the Langevin equation, which can be evaluated using the Fokker-Planck
equation. A thought experiment proposed by Marian Smoluchowski could extract energy from this
process, but Richard Feynman shot down that idea by noting that this process would also apply to
the pawl. This process roughly approaches the (*) Wiener process, like random walks, and Einstein's
model of this process can be used to derive Avogadro's number. The namesake of a hypothetical ratchet is,
for ten points, what phenomenon in which particles in a fluid move randomly, named after the Scottish
biologist who first observed it with grains of pollen suspended in water?
ANSWER: Brownian Motion
The rotational form of this phenomenon was discovered by Peter Debye and describes rotation of electric
dipoles. The noise term appears in a special form of the Langevin equation which describes this effect. This
phenomenon, a stochastic Weiner process, is modeled by an equation that calculates mean squared
displacement. Described by molecular kinetic heat theory in the second Annus Mirabilis paper, it was first
identified in submerged pollen grains. For ten points, give this term named for a Scottish botanist that
describes the seemingly random movement of particles in fluids.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
This phenomenon is the prototypical physical manifestation of a Wiener process. Observations
of this phenomenon helped determine the Avogadro constant using measurements by
Jean Perrin [zhahn pair-an] after this phenomenon was used to prove the existence of molecules. The
theory behind this phenomenon explains why twice the time multiplied by the diffusivity equals the
root-mean-square average displacement. This phenomenon is named for the botanist who observed
it occurring with pollen grains in water. Name this physical phenomenon, similar to a random walk,
that is based on the paths of molecules in fluids and was explained by Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: Brownian motion [prompt on random walks before it is mentioned; prompt on diffusion or word forms thereof]
Richard Feynman proposed a way of obtaining energy from this phenomenon using a namesake "ratchet."
One of the papers from Einstein's "Annus Mirabilis" calculated displacement due to this phenomenon,
which is caused by an imbalance in the force on a particle due to molecular collisions. It was first observed
by its namesake Scottish botanist in a mixture of pollen and water. For 10 points, give this term for the
random motion of suspended particles in a fluid.
ANSWER: Brownian motion [or pedesis]
It is noted as the simplest as well as the virtual limit of all stochastic processes. Thorvard Thiele was the
first to mathematically model it as a Wiener process and Jan Ingenhousz observed it on the surface of
alcohol. Additionally, Lucretius shed light on it in his scientific poem, "On the Nature of Things", citing the
example of sunbeams exposing dust. The time evolution of the position of a particle undergoing this can be
described by a Langevin equation. It was described by the Fokker-Planck equation and Einstein used the
kinetic theory of gases to further explain it. FTP, what is this vibrating movement of particles in a state of
matter named for a Scottish botanist?
ANSWER: Brownian motion
A one dimensional Smolouchowski model describes this process, which can also be described
mathematically by the Weiner process. Albert Einstein defined the diffusion coefficient of this
process as being equal to Boltzmann's constant multiplied by temperature divided by linear drag; in
general this process can be observed under a microscope when particles are large enough that they
have sufficiently slow diffusivities. This stochastic process is the limit of a random walk and was
supposedly discovered by its observer while observing pollen particles in water. For 10 points, name this
apparently random movement of particles in a fluid.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
The Smoluchowski model describing this process considers collisions with a very massive test particle. This
process can be mathematically described by considering spatial interactions, a time-dependent noise term,
and a parameter from Stokes- law in the Langevin equation. This process can be seen as a small-step limit
of a random walk, as it consists of a continuous stochastic process called a Wiener process. Perrin used it to
model atomic motion to find Avogadro's number based on Einstein's 1906 description of it. For 10 points,
identify this type of motion initially observed in pollen grains by its namesake Scottish botanist.
ANSWER: Brownian motion/dynamics [do not accept "Brownian diffusion"]
One model of this phenomenon was verified by Jean Perrin. Studies of this phenomenon revealed
a relationship between the diffusion constant and mobility, Boltzmann's constant, and temperature.
That relation is named after Einstein because it was first found in the second of his (*) Annus
Mirabilis papers. This phenomenon was first observed in pollen grains moving through water. For 10
points, name this random motion of particles suspended in a fluid, which is named for a Scottish botanist.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
Leon Guoy found that this phenomenon was unaffected by electromagnetism or light and occurred to
a greater extent in less viscous fluids. Lars Onsager used it to extend the Debye Huckel theory for
ionic solutions. Combining the Stokes formula in consideration equipartition of a sphere allowed (*)
Langevin to develop an equation explaining this. The Monte Carlo method can simulate this Wiener process
since it is stochastic, and Jean Perrin observed molecules in large jars to estimate Avogadro's number from
this process. It was originally observed in Clarckia pulchella, where particles were 5 microns in size. For 10
points, name this type of random motion first observed by a Scottish botanist in pollen grains.
ANSWER: Brownian motion [accept Brownian after "motion"]
On an m-dimensional Riemannian manifold, the characteristic operator of this process is one half the
Laplace-Beltrami operator. Levy's condition describes the conditions necessary for a continuous process to
be one. On long timescales it is well described by the Langevin equation and the workings of this Weiner
process in fluids was the subject of a 1905 paper by Albert Einstein. For 10 points, first discovered by
looking at pollen grains under a microscope, name this phenomenon, the random movement of particles
suspended in a fluid?
ANSWER: Brownian motion
Ornstein and Uhlenbeck included a term for inertia to improve a previous model for it which was not root
mean square differentiable at t = 0. That model was developed by Paul Langevin. Its trajectory is always
continuous but never differentiable, which makes it a Wiener process. The observation of mastic particles
allowed Jean Perrin to use this process to calculate Avogadro's constant, and it was more famously
characterized by Albert Einstein with the kinetic theory of gases. For 10 points, identify this process
characterized by the random motion of small particles, named after a Scottish biologist who observed pollen
undergoing it.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
Mathematical models for this phenomenon use the Fokker-Planck equation or the Langevin
equation. Jean Perrin used it to obtain Avogadro's number, and Richard Feynman described a
"ratchet" that uses it. This phenomenon is the physical version of the Weiner process, and is also [*] a
stochastic process. The kinetic theory of gases was used in Einstein's 1905 explanation of it, and its
namesake, a Scottish botanist, observed it in pollen grains in water. For 10 points, name this seemingly
random motion of particles suspended in a fluid.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
When the Hurst parameter is not equal to one-half, it leads to the occurrence of the "fractional"
version of this phenomenon, and Park et al proposed using Optical Serial Sectioning Microscopy to
determine temperature by studying this process in nanoparticles. This process can be described by the
Langevin equation, and Jean Perrin used this phenomenon to calculate the Avogadro's constant. It was
observed by its namesake in pollen grains suspended in water, and Einstein explained it using the kinetic
theory of gases. For 10 points, identify this random motion of small particles in a fluid named after a
Scottish Biologist.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
The narrow escape problem concerns the mean escape time for this phenomenon. Governed by the
Langevin equation, its "standard" type is modeled by a Levy process named for Wiener. It can be described
by the Fokker-Planck equation, and an equation stating that this process's mean square displacement is
proportional to the product of elapsed time and diffusivity was published in 1905. Its namesake scientist
discovered it while watching pollen grains suspended in water, and it was explained by Albert Einstein. For
10 points, name this random movement of particles in a fluid.
ANSWER: Brownian motion
This process can be considered a form of semimartingale, especially in its applications to securities
investment and gambling probability predictions. The mean-square displacement of a particle exhibiting this
is shown by the equation r squared= 6k times T times Bt, where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is
temperature, and B is the mobility of the particle. Having a fractal dimension of 2, it is a Wiener process
and can also be approximated using the Langevin (lan-zhuh-van) equation, and Jean Perrin used it to
determine Avogadro's constant. First observed by its namesake in pollen grains suspended in water, For 10
points, name this type of random movement, an analysis of which which was characterized in a 1905 paper
by Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: Brownian Motion
The Cameron-Martin theorem describes how to account for drift in modeling this phenomenon, and
a Feynman thought experiment considered a ratchet that appears to extract work from it.
Displacement arising from this process is proportional to the square root of the time elapsed.
Modeled one-dimensionally by Smoluchowski, this phenomenon was the subject of the first
popularized (*) Langevin equation and is modeled by an almost surely continuous martingale called the
Wiener process. Described using kinetic theory in a 1905 paper by Einstein, it was identified in pollen
molecules floating in water by a namesake Scottish botanist. For 10 points, name this type of motion in
which a small particle moves randomly.
ANSWER: Brownian Motion [prompt on random walk until the end of "ratchet named after this"]
One example of this phenomenon was constructed by taking the limit of the linear interpolation of
the dyadic rationals, which converges uniformly. A fluctuation-diffusion relation for this
phenomenon sets the diffusion constant proportional to mobility times temperature. Considering only
a drag force and a random force of zero mean lets this phenomenon be modeled by the (*) Langevin
equation. Only when the temperature of the pawl is higher than the paddle can work be extracted from this
process in a thought experiment of Feynman. The average displacement of a particle in this process is
proportional to the square root of the time, as in a random walk. For 10 points, name this process modeling
the random motion of particles in a fluid.
ANSWER: Brownian motion [or Wiener process]
The collapse of these entities is described by the Rayleigh-Plesset equation. A process by which
thermonuclear fusion may occur in one of these entities is connected to the phenomenon of
sonoluminescence. That phenomenon is a burst of light resulting from cavitation in one of these entities.
One of these named for the stellar wind grows at a rate of the square root of time. Liquid hydrogen was
employed in detectors like Gargamelle named for these entities, an example of an inventiontion by Donald
Glaser called this kind of "chamber." For 10 points, name these entities found in carbonated drinks.
ANSWER: bubbles
They have been used as detectors in the SIMPLE and PICASSO experiments, and are now being used by
the COUP in their attempts to detect WIMPs. A major drawback of them was an inability to measure
energy directly, but they could infer momentum based on the radii of magnetically induced helical paths. A
piston is moved to expand the volume of a fluid with low surface tension, causing it to become superheated,
so that a tiny amount of additional energy will cause the desired phenomenon, the density of which is
proportional to the ionization of a particle. For 10 points, name this device that tracks the paths of particles
via the formation of small air pockets.
ANSWER: bubble chamber
For crystalline solids with less than cubic symmetry, this quantity is not uniform in all directions and must
be replaced with a tensor with more than one independent variable for proper description. Technically a
thermodynamic quantity, in gases it is the product of pressure and adiabatic index and in fluids, density and
this quantity determine the speed of sound. Unlike the shear type, this quantity describes the material's
response to uniform compression, so its inverse is compressibility. For 10 points, name this elastic modulus,
defined as the pressure necessary to produce a given relative decrease in volume, which is notably not
Young's.
ANSWER: bulk modulus (only need "bulk" after modulus given)
The Boussinesq approximation is used in flows driven by this. In one formulation, this force is equal to
the pressure at the lower point of contact times the area at that point minus the pressure higher point times
that point's area. This is proportional to both gravitational acceleration and the density of the fluid. The
basic idea behind this is Archimedes' principle, which says this is equal to the weight of the displaced fluid.
For 10 points, name this force that allows objects to float in water.
ANSWER: buoyancy [accept buoyant force]
The point where this force intersects the midplane is known as the metacenter, which must lie
above the center of gravity for an object in a fluid to be in static equilibrium. It arises because fluid
pressure increases with depth due to the increasing gravitational weight acting on the fluid. The
magnitude of this force can be calculated from the product of gravity, fluid density, and the volume of
the submerged object using Archimedes- principle. For 10 points, name this force that is equal to the
weight of the fluid an object displaces and allows objects to float on water.
ANSWER: buoyant force [accept buoyancy]
This principle's effects can be seen in a change in pressure through the use of a Cartesian devil. The
value for this property is equal in a single system for all objects that have the same volume. This force has a
value for a given object that is equal to total weight of all the fluid displaced by that object. That idea about
this property is known as Archimedes' Principle. For 10 points, name this force that acts as an upward force
against a submerged object and can cause some objects to float.
ANSWER: buoyancy [or buoyant force]
High compressibility of objects subject to this phenomenon leads to instability at equilibria. Flows driven
by this force can be estimated with the Boussinesq approximation. The Cartesian Devil demonstrates this
force, whose ratio to viscosity can be approximated with the Grashof number. This force regulates isostasy,
and is responsible for convection. The earliest claim about this force was that an object in a fluid is lifted
with force equal to the weight of displaced fluid, this being Archimedes- principle. For 10 points, name this
property that allows boats to float.
ANSWER: buoyancy
This celestial body is composed of roughly equal parts of rock and water ice, with small amounts of volatile
frozen ammonia. Surface features include Gomul Catena, located within the Valhalla multi-ring structure,
and the even longer Gipul Catena, a chain of craters over 600 kilometers long. Both chains formed from the
impact of comets fragmented by the tidal forces of the object around which this satellite orbits. Yet as the
outermost of the Galilean moons, it experiences neither orbital resonance nor tidal heating. FTP, name this
second-largest moon of Jupiter and third-largest moon in the solar system, named after a nymph who first
turned into a bear and then into the constellation Ursa Major.
ANSWER: Callisto
One improvement in this device's history replaced silver chloride with silver iodide and was called
calotyping. One type of this device uses a part invented at Bell Labs by Willard Boyle and George Smith;
that part is a charge-coupled device. A system of mirrors and prisms improves the accuracy of the SLR type
of this device. Early versions of this device created daguerreotypes, which could require exposures of up to
20 minutes. For ten points, name this device used to record images, either digitally or on film.
ANSWER: camera
Nahn is a spectroscopic binary that makes up its nose. Al-Tarf is its brightest star that is designated with the
beta Bayer designation. A loose cluster of feint stars called the Praesepe or the Beehive, is another feature
of the constellation. Lying between Gemini to the west and Leo to the east, the tegmine star system makes
up its shell while the Acubens make up this constellation's claws. People born in between June 21 and July
22 are said to be born FTP, under what zodiac crab constellation?
ANSWER: Cancer
The old definition of this unit was based on blackbody radiation at the freezing point of platinum.
This unit is based on a source of monochromatic radiation of frequency 5.4 times ten to the twelfth
hertz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1/683 watt per steradian. Luminance can
be measured in this SI unit per square meter. Multiplying this unit by steradians gives the SI unit of
luminous flux, the lumen, and multiplying this unit times steradians and dividing by square meters
gives the SI unit of illuminance, the lux. Name this base SI unit.
ANSWER: candela [or standard candle]
A dwarf galaxy discovered in 2003 in this constellation is the closest known galaxy to the Milky Way.
Stars in this constellation include Adhara, Wezen (WAY-zen), and Murzim. This constellation is separated
from a similarly named one by Monoceros (mah-no-SER-os) to its north. Its alpha star forms the Winter
Triangle with Procyon (PRO-kee-on) and Betelgeuse (beetle juice), and is also the brightest star in the night
sky. For 10 points, name this constellation whose brightest star is Sirius, with a name meaning "greater
dog."
ANSWER: Canis Major [do not accept or prompt on "Canis"]
This is the only star brighter than Miaplacidus in its constellation, and it used to be considered the brightest
star in Argo Navis before that constellation was broken up. It is not part of the ancient constellations
because it is not visible from Athens or Rome. It has in the past been the brightest star in the night sky and
is expected to be so again in the future. This star has been used in the past as a guide towards the South
Pole, but it is never seen above 38 degrees North latitude. Name this star with a visual magnitude of -0.72,
the brightest star in Carina and the second brightest star from Earth, after Sirius.
ANSWER: Canopus [prompt on Alpha Carinae]
A "matrix method" named after this quantity solves boundary value problems on irregular regions
and developed from the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula. The reciprocal of this quantity is the
elastance, while the reactance associated with this quantity decreases with increasing frequency. For
one type of device, this quantity equals the permitivity times the ratio of area of two (*) plates to the
distance between them, and can be increased by placing a dielectric between the two plates; more
commonly, it equals charge over voltage. For 10 points, name this quantity that is measured in Farads and is
used to describe charge-storing devices.
ANSWER: capacitance
One plus the voltage gain times this value is known as its Miller form. Reducing PCB traces is one way to
reduce the effects of the parasitic form of this quantity. This value, whose reciprocal is measured in darafs,
can be calculated in parallel circuits by summing its individual values. One half times this quantity times v
squared equals the energy stored in devices that observe this quantity, which is dependent on the
permittivity of the dielectric and the size of the two conducting parallel plates. Equal to charge over voltage,
for ten points, name this quantity measured in farads that represents a material's ability to hold charge.
ANSWER: capacitance
Common mode noise is caused by the parasitic form of this quantity. One type of reactance is
equal to one over the quantity omega times this quantity. For one type of device, it is proportional to
the permeability of free space times area. It is additive in parallel circuits. Current is equal to this
quantity times the time derivative of (*) voltage. Adding a dielectric to a device made of two parallel
plates increases this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitance [prompt on C]
Impedance is always inversely proportional to this quantity. This quantity's inverse is elastance. It is
multiplied by one half voltage squared to obtain the energy stored in its device. It is equal to permittivity
times area over distance. This quantity adds in parallel, unlike resistance and inductance. For 10 points,
identify this quantity that characterizes a device consisting of a pair of conducting plates separate by a
dielectric, and which is measured in Farads.
ANSWER: capacitance
Solving the Laplace equation for a constant potential calculates this quantity. This quantity is calculated as
four pi times the permittivity of free space times radius for a sphere, and the reciprocal of this quantity is
elastance. This quantity is found by summing the inverse of each individual value when their associated
devices are connected in series, while it is summed directly when the devices are in parallel. An early device
associated with this quantity is the Leyden jar. This quantity is more commonly found by dividing charge by
voltage for a namesake parallel-plate device. For 10 points, name this quantity that measures the ability of a
body to store electrical charge.
ANSWER: capacitance [prompt on "C"; prompt on "capacitors"]
One over j times angular frequency times this quantity is a formula for impedance. This quantity equals
the derivative of charge with respect to potential. This quantity can be increased by adding barium titanate
or other dielectrics, and for two thin plates it is proportional to area and inversely proportional to their
separation. This quantity adds in parallel, unlike resistance and inductance. For 10 points, identify this
electrical quantity, measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitance
This quantity is inversely proportional to the difference of the natural log of the inner and outer radii of
a coaxial cable. For a sphere, this quantity is merely equal to the radius of the sphere. This quantity, which
is usually proportional to the permittivity of a material, is added in parallel, unlike resistance. One-half this
quantity times the square of the voltage gives the energy stored in this quantity's associated object, which
often comes in a parallel-plate variety. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitance
This quantity is increased by a factor of one plus the negative gain of the amplifier in the Miller effect. A
type of component will have this form of reactance above its resonant frequency when displaying its
"parasitic" type. Calculation of it for an arbitrary shape is accomplished by solving Laplace's equation with
a constant potential along a conductor's surface. This quantity's inverse is elastance, and it is additive in
series. For one type of device, it is inversely related to the distance between two plates, and in general, it
equals charge over voltage. For 10 points, name this measure of the ability to store charge, measured in
farads.
ANSWER: capacitance [prompt on C]
The Miller Effect predicts that this quantity will increase in an amplifier by a factor of one minus the
voltage gain of the amplifier. For alternating circuit currents it can be written as the angular frequency of the
power source multiplied by the imaginary unit and divided by its reactance. For a coaxial cylindrical shell,
this quantity is proportional to one over the natural log of the ratio of the inner and outer radius of the shell.
Along with resistance and inductance, it makes up the three components of electrical impedance. Defined as
the charge per unit voltage, for 10 points, identify this electrical quantity measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitance
The potential associated with this quantity can be calculated as one-half times this quantity times voltagesquared. Certain materials increase this quantity by a factor called a dielectric constant, which is equal to
one for a vacuum. For one type of device, this quantity is calculated as the electric constant times area over
distance between two parallel plates, and this quantity is defined as charge over voltage. Measured in
farads, For 10 points, name this measure of the strength of a capacitor.
ANSWER: Capacitance
This quantity is multiplied by the voltage gain to produce the "Miller" type of this quantity. Its
inverse is elastance (ee-LAST-ence). For an infinitely thin sphere, it equals four pi times the electric
constant times the radius. This quantity is observed in devices that were predated by the (*) Leyden
Jar; those devices now commonly consist of two parallel-plate conductors that are separated by a dielectric.
It is equal to charge over voltage and measured in Farads ("FAIR"-adz). For 10 points, name this measure
of the amount of stored electrical energy.
ANSWER: capacitance [or C]
The 'stray- form of it causes signal leaking which leads to an effect called crosstalk and the Miller
effect is the abnormal incidence of this property at the input of an inverting amplifier. A torsion
balance suspended an element with this property and was used to look for torque due to ether drag in
the Trouton-Noble experiment. The (*) reactance due to this property is equal to minus one over the
applied circular frequency times one over this property; one over this property is itself known as the
elastance and the aforementioned negative sign indicates that the AC potential across devices with this
property lags the current by pi over four. FTP, name this property of an object to hold charge that is
formally the ratio of charge over voltage.
ANSWER: Capacitance [prompt on C]
The presence of this quality allows for AC coupling to occur, and "snubbers" use this effect to contain radio
interference. This quality decreases in strength as distance increases and devices that use this quality add in
strength directly in a parallel circuit. When the maximum value for this quality, whose inverse is elastance,
is exceeded, the breakdown voltage has been reached. Camera flashbulbs rely on this quality, which is
measured in farads. For 10 points, name this quality whose magnitude is the amount of electrical charge that
can be stored in a namesake device that features a pair of parallel plates.
ANSWER: capacitance
In physics, one way to calculate this value is to multiply the relative static permittivity with the
permittivity of free space and the area of two plates in square meters and dividing them by the
distance of separation of two plates. This value is described as the amount of electric charge stored for
an electric potential. Given the definition, another way to calculate this value is to divide the charge by
voltage. Identify, for ten points, this value whose SI unit is the farad.
ANSWER: Capacitance
Deep-level transient spectroscopy works by observing the transient value of this quantity related to
the change in width of the depletion region of a diode. An inverting voltage amplifier increases this
quantity in the Miller effect. The inverse of this quantity is called the (*) elastance, and like inductance
this quantity can be altered in crosstalk. The value of this quantity is increased by the insertion of a
dialectric, and it's proportional to area and inversely proportional to separation. This quantity adds in
parallel configurations, but its reciprocal adds in a series configuration. For 10 points, name this quantity
which is equal to charge divided by voltage, usually measured in Farads.
ANSWER: capacitance
The Miller effect is an increase in this quantity in an amplifier by a factor of one minus amplifier gain. This
quantity's inverse is known as elastance, and for the device associated with this quantity, energy is equal to
one-half this quantity times voltage squared. The magnitude of this quantity is affected by the area of plates,
distance between them, and the dielectric constant of the material between those plates. This quantity is
associated with namesake devices capable of storing charge, such as the Leyden Jar. For 10 points, name
this quantity measured in Farads and defined as the magnitude of charge over applied voltage.
ANSWER: capacitance [prompt on C]
A quantum version of this quantity for 2D-electron systems is equal to the fundamental charge squared
times the density of states; graphene's band structure gives it two values of this quantity. Changes in this
quantity are measured in deep level transient spectroscopy. It can be increased using an inverting voltage
amplifier by 1 minus A sub v, an effect exploited in pole splitting named for Miller. Its inverse is known as
elastance, and for an isolated sphere its equal to four pi epsilon a. In another configuration, it is equal to
epsilon times epsilon sub naught times A over d. The SI unit for this quantity is measured in coulombs per
volts and is called the farad. For 10 points, name this measure of the amount of electric charge stored in a
namesake electronic component.
ANSWER: capacitance
This quantity increases by a factor of one plus the amplitude gain in the Miller effect, and the reciprocal of
this quantity is elastance. It can be calculated for an isolated sphere as 4 pi times epsilon naught times the
sphere radius, and the energy in devices associated with this quantity is one half this quantity times voltage
squared. Dielectrics can increase it, and for two parallel plates this quantity increases with area and
decreases with distance. This quantity is also equal to charge over voltage. For 10 points, name this quantity
typically measured in farads that is associated with devices capable of storing charge.
ANSWER: Capacitance
The impedance of these objects varies inversely with frequency, and their potential difference lags current.
These objects are often filled with mica, plastic, or glass, though they also work well when they contain a
vacuum. Filling materials must be chosen that have a high permittivity and high breakdown voltage to serve
as dielectrics inside these objects. The strength of these objects is measured by dividing charge by electric
potential difference and is often stated in farads. Name these components consisting of chargeable plates
that are often used together with inductors and resistors.
ANSWER: capacitors
In RLC circuits, these objects are analogous to springs. The energy stored in these devices is
proportional to the square of the voltage drop across them, and can be increased by inserting a
dielectric. The strength of one type is given by electric permittivity times (*) area divided by thickness;
that type is made of two parallel plates. Their strength is measured by a very large SI unit, so it is often
given in microfarads instead. For 10 points, name these circuit components that store charge.
ANSWER: capacitors
The switched types of these devices are used as filters in integrated circuits and behave similarly to
resistors. The common measurement of these devices is multiplied by resistance to calculate the time it
takes them to discharge. These generally include an insulator called a dielectric between two conductors.
Their common measurement is charge divided by electric potential difference. Name these devices whose
strength is measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitors
One form of these devices rely on the "pseudo" form of their namesake property exemplified by ruthenium
dioxide wherein a voltage-dependent heterogenous charge-transfer process is responsible for their behavior.
Another version relies on a specific interface that causes one type of ions to be tightly absorbed and the
other type to be diffused, resulting a double layer akin to the geometry of these elements. Their namesake
property is inversely proportional to the separation distance and directly proportional to the area of the
plates. For 10 points, identify these circuit elements whose namesake property is measured in Farads, and
which consist of two conducting materials separated by a dielectric, allowing them to store energy.
ANSWER: capacitor [prompt on condenser; accept supercapacitors or ultracapacitors or electric double layer capacitors or electrochemical double layer capacitors or pseudocapacitors early]
Condenser microphones use variable versions of this device to transduce sound. "Super" examples of this
device use high-surface-area substances like charcoal in a double-layer to achieve better performance than
in electrolytic ones. In parallel, its equivalent characteristic parameter is the sum of the individual
characteristic parameters. Fringing fields tend to draw dielectric materials into these devices, in which the
dielectric separates two conducting plates. Their namesake property is measured by the amount of charge
they store per unit voltage. For 10 points, name this device which stores energy in an electric field, whose
namesake property is measured in Farads.
ANSWER: capacitors [accept variable capacitors; accept supercapacitors]
OS-CON is an organic type of these devices. In an AC circuit, Fourier analysis gives the impedance of
these elements as one over the angular velocity times this elements namesake unit. Ewald Georg von Kleist
was the first person to create one of these. The insulator between two plates in one of these devices is called
a dielectric. The Leyden jar was the first one of these created. For 10 points, name this device that stores
charge and has units of Farads.
ANSWER: capacitor
The impedance for this device is inversely proportional to frequency. In a DC circuit with this
device, if a switch is initially open and is closed at time zero, the voltage across this device is defined
as V-sub-0 times the quantity one minus e to the negative t over tau. These circuit elements add in (*)
parallel. The most common type contains a dielectric between its parallel plates. For 10 points, name this
circuit element that stores charge and is characterized by a quantity measured in Farads.
ANSWER: capacitor
The Trouton-Noble experiment found that a freely suspended one of these devices orients itself
perpendicular to the motion of the Earth. An op-amp connected to a pair of resistors and one of these
devices creates a gyrator. For a spherical type of this device, one quantity equals four pi epsilon-nought
over the difference of the reciprocals of the inner and outer radii. The namesake property of these devices is
altered with the addition of a dielectric, and is defined as charge over voltage and is measured in Farads.
For 10 points, name these devices that store charge, usually in the form of two parallel plates.
ANSWER: capacitor [accept condenser]
The reservoir type of these devices smooths pulsating direct current from rectifiers. The Q factor,
which relates energy loss in these devices, is a function of equivalent series resistance. In them, a lag
of pi over 2 radians exists for [*] voltage behind current; their breakdown voltage depends on the
dielectric strength. Their strength is proportional to the area of their parallel plates and inversely
proportional to their distance. A really old one was the Leyden Jar, and its namesake unit, measured in
coulombs per volt, is the farad. For 10 points, name this circuit device that stores charge.
ANSWER: capacitors [accept condensers]
A large number of these devices are used along with spark gap switches in Marx generators, while an
early example of this device is the Leyden jar. The time constant of one kind of circuit gives the time
needed to charge one of these to about sixty-three percent. Generally composed of two conducting
plates separated by a dielectric, these devices- namesake quantity sums directly in parallel, and they are
one of the two components of an RC circuit. For 10 points, identify these circuit elements across which
charge, and therefore a potential difference, builds up over time.
ANSWER: capacitors
A time constant associated with one of these devices, denoted with a lowercase tau, gives the time it
takes for them to reach about 63.2% of their maximum power. An early device that essentially acted
as one of these components was comprised of a glass jar filled with water with metal on the inner and
outer surfaces. Originally devised as the Leyden jar, the strength of these devices is proportional to their
area divided by their separating distance or equal to their charge divided by voltage and is measured in
farads. For 10 points, name this electric device that is composed of two plates separated by a dielectric
insulator, used to store electrical energy.
ANSWER: capacitor
The main precursor to this device was the Leyden jar. The quantity associated with this device can be
calculated as the ratio of charge to voltage. A dielectric separates the two parallel plates in the basic form of
what circuit component, whose namesake quantity is measured in farads, that stores electrical charge?
ANSWER: capacitor
Higher performance types of this device are made from tantalum. The phase angle of this device
is negative ninety degrees, which means its impedance varies as one over angular frequency and its
voltage lags the current by ninety degrees. This device is characterized by a parameter equal to (*)
charge divided by voltage. In its simplest form, it consists of two parallel plates. For 10 points, identify this
circuit component that stores charge in an electric field and whose characteristic parameter is measured in
farads.
ANSWER: capacitor
When resistors are connected to these devices in a circuit, the time constant for the decay of current is
directly proportional to both the resistance and their strength. The impedance of these devices is inversely
proportional to the frequency, and energy stored in them is proportional to voltage squared. The strength of
these devices can be increased by a dielectric, and their namesake quantity adds when they are placed in
parallel in a circuit. Their strength is given by the amount of charge they store per volt, which is measured
in farads. They frequently consist of two parallel plates. For 10 points, name these components that store
electric charge.
ANSWER: Capacitors
When these devices are connected to inductors, current will oscillate at the circuit's resonant frequency, and
Pieter van Musschenbroek invented an early one named the Leyden jar. The quantity measuring their
strength is added when these are in parallel, and can be increased by inserting a dielectric. For 10 points,
name these circuit elements consisting of two plates, whose ability to store charge is measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitors [accept condensers]
Most modern forms of these devices are made of tantalum or ceramics. Their strength is inversely
proportional to the distance between their ends and directly proportional to their area. Unlike resistors, the
strength of these devices in parallel equals the sum of their individual strengths. They contain an insulating
material called a dielectric. On a circuit diagram, they are represented by two parallel lines. For 10 points,
name these circuit components used to store electrical energy.
ANSWER: capacitors
When used with resistors, they can be used to eliminate signals above or below desired frequencies in highpass and low-pass filters. The quantity associated with these objects is equal to charge over voltage, and the
function of one can be improved by placing an insulating material that conducts electric fields between its
two metal plates. For 10 points, identify this circuit element which stores charge, and whose namesake
property is measured in Farads.
ANSWER: capacitor
These devices are used with resistors in high-pass filters, because unlike a complementary device,
they do not allow persistent DC current. Their namesake quantity is usually proportional to the
permittivity, and although it decreases in series, it is added when they are placed in parallel. These
devices possess a breakdown voltage which can be increased by strengthening the (*) dielectric. The
namesake property of these devices is equal to the charge over the voltage and is measured in farads. An
early example of these devices was the Leyden jar, while a common version consists of two parallel plates.
For 10 points, name these devices which store charge.
ANSWER: capacitor
These components stop working at the "breakdown voltage." They have the ability to pass AC and block
DC current. When these circuit components are in parallel, they have the same applied voltage, and their
characteristic value adds up. When connected in series, their equivalent characteristic value is found by
summing the reciprocals of each individual value. The simplest type of this device is the "parallel plate"
type, in which two metal plates are separated by a dialectric material. The first device of this type was
known as a Leyden Jar. For 10 points, name this circuit component, also called a condenser, which stores
electric charge.
ANSWER: capacitors [accept condensors before it is read]
The variable types of these entities are implemented in L/C circuits to set resonance frequency. These
entities may also be used to tune antennae via impedance matching. The electrolytic versions of these
entities possess high values for their namesake property, but must be employed at low frequencies. These
entities possess a quantity known as the breakdown voltage, which is the voltage at which the dialectric
becomes conductive. The Leyden jar is an example of one of these objects, which collect energy from two
conductive plates. For 10 points, name these electrical devices used to store charge.
ANSWER: capacitors
Barium titanate is commonly used in ceramic ones. Their namesake metric is equal to the relative
permittivity times the ratio of area to spacing. They are subject to leakage and are represented as a straight
line separated from a curved line in circuit diagram. Leyden jars were an early example of these. They are
measured by dividing the charge by the potential difference. They consist of a dielectric in between two
conducting plates. For 10 points, name these devices that store charge in a circuit.
ANSWER: capacitors
Marx generators use a large number of these connected in series by spark gap switches to generate a high
voltage. One of their components has an electrolytic variety, which soaks that component in liquid
electrolyte but is not suitable for high frequency operation. One of these appears with a resistor, a switch,
and a DC source in charging circuits. FTP, name this type of circuit element that uses a dielectric to store
energy between a pair of conducting plates and whose strength is measured as the ratio of charge and
induced voltage.
ANSWER: capacitor
While not related to tectonic plates or fluids, the Love approximation is used in relation to these
devices to deal with complicated edge effects. Since the curl of the electric field is zero in
electrostatics, there must be fringe field on the edges of these devices. The change in energy stored
can be used to calculate the force on a (*) dielectric in one of these devices. The middle of these devices
has a constant electric field and the energy in them is proportional to voltage squared. In these devices, the
surface area of the components and dielectrics determine the proportionality constant between voltage and
the charge on them. Their namesake property adds directly in parallel. For 10 points, name these devices
generally consisting of parallel plates rated in Farads.
ANSWER: capacitors
DRAMs store single bits of data in these objects, which are one of two key objects used in snubbing to
suppress voltage fluctuations across thyristors. This device is often given a ripple current rating, explaining
the AC application of current through it. Its breakdown voltage is given as the dielectric times separation
distance, while its potential energy is given by q-squared over two C. For 10 points, identify this physical
device exemplified by the Leyden Jar, which builds up charge in an RC circuit and which is commonly used
to store charge across an insulating layer.
ANSWER: capacitor [prompt on cloud condenser]
A certain quantity for spherical objects of this type is inversely proportional to the difference in
reciprocals of the radii. These objects stop working when the breakdown voltage is reached. The time
constant in systems with one of these objects and a resistor is equal to the resistance times a
namesake quantity. That quantity is equal to permittivity times area divided by distance for a (*)
parallel-plate one, is measured in farads, and can be increased by inserting a dielectric. For ten points,
identify these circuit elements whose namesake unit equals charge over voltage, which store energy in an
electric field.
ANSWER: capacitors
One equation useful for the simplest type of these circuit components is permittivity times area all
divided by distance. The SI unit of these components is defined in coulombs per volt. In parallel, the
measure of the effectiveness of these components adds; in series, you must take the sum of the reciprocals
of the individual measures. The most basic types of these circuit components are made up of two parallel
plates. For 10 points, name these circuit components whose ability to store charge is measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitors
They are not diodes, but the light emitting type of these devices produce electro-luminescent light. A
dynamic RAM stores data on these devices and a Marx generator consists of several of them. A net torque
was not observed on a suspended one of these devices in the Trouton-Nobel experiment. A method for
keeping the power smooth involves adding the decoupling type of this device, and the smoothing out of
voltage pulses produced by a rectifier is performed by the reservoir type. They consist of two conductors
with opposite signs separated from each other by a dielectric, such as glass or mica, and an example of one
is the Leyden jar. FTP name these circuit elements used to store electric charge, and whose characteristic
property is measured in farads.
ANSWER: capacitors [accept condensers]
The impedance of these devices is inversely proportional to angular frequency. The current
through these devices is equal to the time derivative of the voltage. Unusually, these devices sum
reciprocally in series circuits and add in parallel circuits. The energy stored in these devices is equal
to one-half times voltage times (*) charge. Their simplest type has a dielectric placed between its parallel
plates. For 10 points, name these devices that store energy in an electric field, unlike inductors or resistors.
ANSWER: capacitors [or condensers]
When this device is connected to a motor to raise a weight, its namesake constant can be given by 2mgh
divided by voltage squared. The reactance of one of these is inversely proportional to its namesake constant.
On a phasor diagram, the current in one of these leads the voltage by 90 degrees. One experiment found that
a freely-suspended one of these did not prove the existence of the aether; that was the Trouton-Noble
experiment. Concentric conducting shells can construct the spherical type, and the parallel-plate type often
has a dielectric inserted between the plates to increase the namesake constant. Name this circuit component
that stores energy in an electric field.
ANSWER: capacitor
Mylar and Kapton are films used in these objects at low frequencies. Their failure in motherboards is called
their namesake "plague", and the mica types of these objects have the advantage of being highly stable over
time and at varying temperatures. For a spherical one of these, its associated quantity is defined as four-pi
times the permittivity of free space divided by the difference in the inverses of the sphere's inner and outer
radii. That quantity is simply defined as charge over voltage for the parallel plate type of this device. It is
often symbolized by two parallel lines in circuits. For 10 points, name these devices with the ability to store
charge.
ANSWER: capacitor
Benjamin Franklin created the first flat version of these, called Franklin Squares. Early experiments used
high voltages, which caused corona discharges to skew results. Failures in one type can cause production of
excess hydrogen, making them swell and pop. The reservoir type acts as a rectifier, smoothing AC current,
and boric acid or sodium borate is usually used in the electrolytic type. The earliest ones, invented by Pieter
van Musschenbroek, were called Leyden jars. Made up of two conducting plates separated by a dielectric,
or non-conducting, substance, their effectiveness is measured in farads. For 10 points, name these electrical
components that store charge.
ANSWER: capacitor or condensor (prompt on Leyden jars until mentioned)
In 1999, Keller et al proposed a method for using a cryogenic type of this device and single electron
tunneling for defining a derived SI unit. Julius Lilienfeld created the first modern electrolytic version of
this device, where a chemical reaction between a metal foil an electrolyte forms a nonconducting layer. An
early forerunner of this device was the Leyden jar, which stored charge on metal surfaces separated by air.
The amount of charge that can be stored depends on the surface area of the plates and the dielectric constant
of the material separating the plates. For 10 points, name these electronic devices rated in terms of Farads.
ANSWER: capacitor
Stars with this element in their atmosphere have a spectra that features Swan bands. A core of oxygen
and this element, as well as a helium envelope, is found in stars at the tip of the asymptotic giant branch.
White dwarfs that exceed the Chandrasekhar limit due to accretion generally undergo a Type Ia supernova
in a detonation named for this element. Only 25 MeV--as opposed to 26.2--of energy is released in a stellar
process that uses this element as an intermediate and recovers it at the end. That process also uses nitrogen
and oxygen as intermediates. This element is formed in the triple-alpha process. For 10 points, identify this
element with atomic symbol C.
ANSWER: carbon [or C until it is read]
The star R Coronae Borealis varies irregularly due to emission of clouds of this element. The
atmosphere of CW Leonis is dominated by this element. In addition to transition metal oxides and
lithium, compounds containing this element are characteristic of spectra of brown dwarfs. The
immediate cause of type Ia supernovae is the "detonation" named for it, which occurs when core
temperatures become high enough to fuse it. Hoyle predicted the existence of a resonance nuclear
state of one isotope of this element that is formed by the (*) triple-alpha process. Oxygen, nitrogen, and
this element are used catalytically in a namesake cycle that is the major alternative to the proton-proton
chain. For 10 points, name this element which is the basis of all known forms of life.
ANSWER: carbon [or C; accept isotopes like (number)C or carbon-(number), where (number) is from 8 to 23 inclusive]
Beoit Paul Emile Clapeyron explained one of these by plotting pressure against volume. Its namesake
illustrated its effects with a temperature-entropy diagram. That work in Reflections on the Motive Power of
Fire laid the foundations for the Second Law of Thermodynamics. At one point in this process, an adiabatic
expansion of a gas occurs, followed by an isothermal compression as heat flows back into an external
reservoir. FTP, name this thermodynamic cycle, the most efficient method for converting a given amount of
heat into work, named for a French physicist.
ANSWER: Carnot Cycle Accept Carnot heat engine
A plot of this process in temperature-entropy phase space forms a perfect rectangle. Fuel cells can
violate one theorem named for this process, and a quantity important in describing it is equal to W over Q
sub H and is symbolized eta. Comparing it to other processes proves the equivalence of the Clausius and
Kelvin statements of the second law of thermodynamics. One implementation of it uses a gas in contact
with hot and cold reservoirs. Its efficiency is one minus the ratio of the cold temperature to the hot
temperature. This reversible process has four steps, including both isothermal and adiabatic compressions.
For 10 points, name this maximally efficient theoretical engine, named after the French scientist who first
described it.
ANSWER: Carnot cycle [or Carnot engine]
One process known as a practical form of this process uses an isobaric process for its addition and
rejection processes. This process gives an upper limit of efficiency equal to one minus the
temperature of the cold reservoir divided by the temperature of the hot reservoir, thus this process
gives a quantifiable limit to the second law of thermodynamics. This process sees no change in
entropy and contains four steps; the first step is the isothermal expansion of a gas to drive a piston. For 10
points, name this idealistic process that describes the most efficient heat engine, a non-obtainable process
developed by a French physicist.
ANSWER: Carnot cycle
It was first proposed in an 1824 work titled "Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire", and operates on a
thermodynamically reversible cycle consisting of 4 steps: isothermal expansion, isentropic expansion,
isothermal compression, and isentropic compression. This hypothetical device ideally transfers energy from
a hot resevoir to a cold resevoir, producing mechanical work. FTP, name this namesake engine proposed by
a French physicist, whose efficiency is always greater than that of any real heat engine.
ANSWER: Carnot Engine
The theory of this effect originally applied only to dielectric materials and ideal metals, and it is linked to
the possibility of faster-than-light travel as the region in which it takes place has negative energy density. As
plates are pushed to within a few nanometers of each other, fewer waves can actually contribute to the
vacuum energy, making the energy density between the plates fall below that of the surrounding space. This
is, for 10 points, what small attractive force that acts between two very close parallel uncharged conducting
plates, which provides evidence for the quantum vacuum, named for the Dutch physicist who predicted its
existence.
ANSWER: Casimir effect
This effect decreases the time a photon spends as an electron-positron pair, permitting them to travel
a tiny fraction faster than c, as calculated by Scharnhorst. Anharmonic oscillators named for this
effect can model some MEMS components. This effect is invoked in the baryon mass prediction of the
chiral bag model and in Julian Schwinger's explanation for sonoluminescence. Its namesake demonstrated
the force resulting from this effect with Polder. Lifshitz used van der Waals forces to explain this
phenomenon on a microscopic scale. Resulting from nonzero vacuum energy, for 10 points, name this
attractive force that occurs between two uncharged conducting plates.
ANSWER: Casimir -Lifshitz effect
Along with quark interaction energy considered as a perturbation, it accounts for a portion of
hadron masses in the bag model. It can be extended to dialectic bodies using Lifshitz's theory of
retarded dispersion forces and its (*) dynamic form has been proposed as an explanation for
sonolumninescence. The energy it generates can be obtained through the determination of the vacuum
expectation value using Green's function and it can also occur due to fluctuations in a Dirac fermionic field.
FTP, name this effect in which zero-point fluctuations in electromagnetic fields generate an attractive force
between two parallel conducting plates.
ANSWER: Casimir-Polder effect [or Casimir energy]
Randjabar-Daemi found third and fifth inverse powers in the objects associated with this
phenomenon when examining it in a six dimensional vortex. Julian Schwinger used the difference of
the sums of bulk energy for the medium of a material and a vacuum to calculate a dynamic form of
this phenomenon. The formula for this phenomenon includes a term for the product of 240 and the
distance raised to the fourth power. The namesake force in this effect is sometimes named for Polder.
Calculated by Steven Lamoreaux, and also calculated by analyzing the zero-point energy between the
boundaries, for ten points, name this effect that shows the existence of a quantum vacuum by allowing only
waves with half-integer wavelengths to appear between two plates, causing a net pressure to force them
together, named for a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: Casimir Effect
One of the laws named after this person states that a normal vector to the ecliptic and a normal vector to the
orbital path of the moon are both perpendicular to the spin axis of the moon. His other laws state that the
equator of the moon makes a constant angle with the ecliptic and that the rotation and revolution periods of
the moon are equal. After Huygens discovered Titan, this person discovered the next four moons of Saturn,
and he is also the namesake of the gap between the outermost rings of Saturn. Name this namesake of an
orbiter now studying Saturn.
ANSWER: Giovanni Cassini
The equipment used by this scientist in his namesake experiment was actually designed and built by
John Mitchell. That apparatus consisted of two pairs of lead spheres of 350 and 1.6 pounds set on a torsion
balance. That experiment was intended to measure the Earth's density, but ultimately yielded both the
Earth's mass and a universal constant. For 10 points, name this British scientist who completed Newton's
Law of Universal Gravitation by measuring the gravitational constant.
ANSWER: Henry Cavendish
Due to their icy composition, some of these objects such as 60588 Echeclus can be classified as both
asteroids and comets due to their exhibition of coma. Although they possess a wide variety of colors making
the classification of surface composition difficult, they are usually classified into two major color groups:
very red and blue-grey. None have ever been imaged by spacecraft, but there is evidence that Saturn's
moon Phoebe may be a captured object of this type. Orbiting between Jupiter and Neptune, FTP, what icy
planetoids, the best known of which is Chiron, and are named after half-men, half-horses from Greek
mythology.
ANSWER: Centaurs
Integrating density times quantity position minus this thing, end quantity, with respect to volume,
is equal to zero. For an arbitrary 2D shape, this can be found by dropping two plumb lines from
different edges and seeing where they intersect. For a many body system, it is equal to the sum of
each mass times its (*) position all over the total mass. High jumpers performing the Fosbury Flop do so
by having this point cross under the bar while they soar over. For 10 points, name this point where an
object can be balanced.
ANSWER: center of mass [or barycenter]
For a non-uniform three-dimensional object, this entity is represented by the vector X such that
integrating the difference between X and a given point times the density at that point with respect to
volume is zero. For two binary objects moving elliptically, their speeds are greatest the closer they
are to this entity. It can be found experimentally by intersecting two plumb lines, and the (*) parallelaxis theorem demonstrates that moment of inertia is minimized when an axis goes through this point. It is
the point at which gravitational torque is zero, and for uniform objects it is located at the centroid. For ten
points, identify this location, the weighted average of a system's mass.
ANSWER: center of mass (or center of gravity)
A reference frame commonly used for analyzing particle collisions is named for this location and
is also called the zero-momentum reference frame. For a two-body system with no external force, this
location has a fixed point that can be determined by taking the sum of weights times position over the
total weight of the system. (*) High jumpers and pole vaulters twist their bodies over the bar to keep this
position low. For 10 points, name this point in an object where the weighted relative position of mass is
zero.
ANSWER: center of mass [or barycentre; or center of gravity]
The use of this entity's namesake coordinates reduces a two-body problem to two one-body problems
because all motion can be decomposed into rotation about and translation of this entity; consequently, the
so-called effective force and moment on a body act at this location. This point can be found for a planar
body at the intersection of plumb lines for different orientations. For 10 points, name this point coincident
with the centroid for a constant-density body and equal to the weight average of the position divided by the
total weight.
ANSWER: the center of mass [or barycenter; grudgingly accept center of gravity; prompt on CoM]
For a variable density object, this value can be determined by dividing the volume integral of position times
density by the volume integral of density. The total moment of inertia about an axis is equal to mass times
distance to a parallel axis squared plus moment about this position for the parallel axis. This value can be
calculated by taking a weighted sum of the positions of the various masses in a system and dividing by the
total mass. For 10 points, gravity can be said to act entirely on what point at which an object can be
balanced?
ANSWER: center of mass or com [accept center of gravity or cog]
Forces of this type yield solvable trajectories only if they take on one of six general four-term forms,
as shown by Broucke; those forms include three monomial forms that have a stability index of plus or
minus 2. In systems that experience this type of force, one conserved quantity is the cross product of
the binormal vector and angular momentum. The motion of a system with an inverse cubic force of
this type is a Cotes spiral, and is one of three cases that is soluble in terms of trigonometric functions
rather than (*) elliptic integrals. According to Bertrand's theorem, this type of force can only form closed
orbits if it is linear or inverse-square. In two-body systems with this kind of force, the cross product of the
position and velocity vectors is constant over time; this is a generalization of the law of areal velocities due
to Kepler. For 10 points, name these forces that depend only on the distance between objects and act along
the line connecting them.
ANSWER: central forces [reverse-prompt on "inverse-square force" until "inverse cubic" is read]
In a rotating reference frame, this quantity is given by "omega cross r cross, in brackets, m times
omega". This is always exerted upon all bodies in a non-inertial frame of reference, and the Coriolis
effect is always present under the same conditions. At the equator, an object experiences this equal to
approximated (*) 1/289th of standard gravity. In Lagrangian mechanics, this term is sometimes used to
describe the generalized force. There are two different facets of this concept, the fictitious force, and the
reactive force. It can be applied in namesake rotating devices, as well as in planetary orbits. For 10 points,
name this representation of the effects of inertia, often confused with centripetal force.
ANSWER: Centrifugal Force
In spinning rooms where the floor falls out, this force is equal to the normal force exerted on a
mass. In the case of an object going around a banked curve without friction, this force is the
horizontal component of the (*) normal force. For a car going around a flat curve, this force is caused by
the friction between the tires and the road. For 10 points, name the pseudoforce that causes objects to
accelerate along circular paths equal to mass times radius times omega squared, or mass times velocity
squared over radius.
ANSWER: centripetal force [prompt on "centripetal acceleration"]
The acceleration caused by this kind of force can be determined by creating two similar triangles out of
the velocity vectors for an object in motion at two points. The acceleration for an object under this force is
equal to the velocity squared over the length of the radius of the object's travel. This type of force is used
on cars in roller coaster loops. For 10 points, name this type of force that is center-seeking and opposed by
the fictitious centrifugal force.
ANSWER: centripetal force [do not accept or prompt on "centrifugal"]
These objects are the basis for the science done by the Key Project of the Hubble Space Telescope.
Together with SX Phoenicis and Delta Scuti objects, among others, these astronomical bodies inhabit the
instability strip. Sandage's method is used to remove bias from a relation relevant to these objects, and
determining the zero-point of that relation is part of the mission of the Hipparcos satellite. The cluster-type
variety of these objects belongs to population II and is exemplified by RR Lyrae stars. Interstellar reddening
of these stars can be measured from their color-period relation, which is independent of distance, and their
period-luminosity relation was first calculated by Henrietta Levitt. For 10 points, name these objects whose
precise variability makes them viable for use as "standard candles" in determining the size of the universe.
ANSWER: Cepheid variable stars (prompt on "variable")
A central phenomenon exhibited by these objects is explained by the Kappa mechanism. Classification
within these objects is determined by the member's metallicity. Measurements done on these objects help
calculate Hubble's constant. W-Virginis stars are part of the Type II class of these stars. These stars are
generally found in the instability strip of the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. Along with R R Lyrae stars,
these stars are often used as standard candles to measure astronomical distances. A notable example of one
of these is Polaris, which has fluctuating luminosity values. For 10 points, name these stars often used as
reliable standard candles in measuring astronomical distances.
ANSWER: Cepheid Variable Star [accept variable stars until "type II," prompt on it thereafter]
These objects gain their most notable property due to their outer layer of doubly ionized helium
expanding, becoming less opaque, then collapsing due to gravity; that occurs in the kappa mechanism.
While doing work on the Magellanic Cloud, Henrietta Leavitt discovered the intrinsic relationship between
these objects' period and luminosity, which allows them to be used to determine distances. For 10 points,
name these variable stars that are often used as standard candles.
ANSWER: Cepheid variables [prompt on variables stars]
Subclasses of this type of object are named for Delta Scuti and W Virginis. Doubly ionized helium
converts to singly ionized helium in the atmosphere of these stars as they expand and contract,
creating its characteristic "shark fin" light curve. Henrietta Leavitt used large populations of these
stars in the Magellanic Clouds to develop a (*) period-Luminosity relation for them, and Edwin Hubble
used this relationship to calibrate his namesake constant of universe expansion. For 10 points, name this
class of intrinsic variable stars used as standard candles .
ANSWER: Cepheid Variables
An early explanation for the behavior of these astronomical objects involved the existence of a conductive
ionized-hydrogen zone capable of functioning as a heat engine; however, Eddington's model, also called the
kappa-mechanism, provided insufficient energy absorption. Baker and Kippenhahn later demonstrated that
helium ionization could serve as a viable mechanism for the characteristic properties of these entities.
Hubble studied them in Andromeda and Triangulum to note that those galaxies were not part of the Milky
Way. Unlike the similar RR Lyrae class, which are also found in the instability strip, stars in this class have
a period ranging from 1 to 50 days. Useful as standard candles as noted by Henrietta Leavitt, for 10 points,
name this class of variable stars.
ANSWER: Cepheid variables [accept variable stars before "RR"]
The shape of these star's luminosity curves is referred to as a "shark fin." Edward Hubble used these
stars to determine that the Andromeda nebula was not part of the Milky Way. With their less
luminous cousins, the RR Lyrae stars, these stellar objects lie in the instability strip. While cataloging
stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud, Henrietta Leavitt discovered the period-luminosity relationship of
these objects. For 10 points, name these variable stars, which are often used as standard candles to work out
the distance to different astronomical objects.
ANSWER: Cepheid variable stars [prompt on variable stars before it is read]
After looking at data collected from Hipparcos on two hundred seventy-three of these objects, Feast and
Catchpole wrote that minor adjustments should be made to previous luminosity measurements. The most
accurately measured one of these objects is RS Puppis, and these objects are very similar to RR Lyraes.
These objects have been used to study the structure of our galaxy and the universe, since their luminosity
can be calculated, making it easy to calculate their distance from Earth. Name these objects that over the
course of days or months go through a pulsation cycle of changing luminosity.
ANSWER: Cepheid variables [prompt on variables stars]
High-resolution UV images of this body in 1995 by the Hubble space telescope showed a dark-spot on its
surface that was named after its discoverer. The surface composition of this body consists of a significant
amount of hydrated minerals, as well as iron-rich phyllosilicate clays and carbonates. It's not Uranus, but
this object's existence was predicted by the Titius-Bode law, though that law was disproven by the
discovery of Neptune in 1846. In Spring 2015, Dawn is expected to enter an orbit around this object after a
year surveying Vesta. First thought to have been a comet by Giuseppe Piazzi in 1801, this celestial body is
now classified as the smallest member of a group with constituents Haumea, Eris and Pluto. For 10 points,
identify this dwarf planet of the asteroid belt.
ANSWER: 1 Ceres
One device at this facility is named for the Rabelais (RAB-uh-ley) character Gargamelle
(GAR-guh-mell). This facility funded the ENQUIRE project, which was headed by Tim Berners-Lee and
developed the prototype of the World Wide Web. Through the CMS and ATLAS projects, this facility
hopes to discover the Higgs boson. For 10 points, name this Swiss laboratory which houses the Large
Hadron Collider.
ANSWER: CERN [or European Organization for Nuclear Research]
One experiment being conducted at this institution utilizes a calorimeter containing twenty seven tons of
liquid krypton and seeks to study CP-violation in hyperons. In addition to the NA48 experiment, this
institution employed the conductors of the UA1 and UA2 experiments, Carlo Rubbia and Simon van der
Meer, the discoverers of the W and Z bosons. This facility is home to the Gargamelle bubble chamber, and
its largest project came online in 2007 to seek out the Higgs boson. For 10 points, name this facility that is
home to the Large Hadron Collider, a physics laboratory in Switzerland.
ANSWER: CERN [accept European Organization for Nuclear Research (or that in French)]
While working at this organization, Tim Berners-Lee invented the precursor to the World Wide
Web. Researchers at this organization were the first to use stochastic cooling to detect the W and Z
bosons. Notable experiments being conducted by this organization include CMS and ATLAS. The
OPERA collaboration between Gran Sasso and this organization erroneously reported superluminal
(*) neutrinos. In March 2013, this organization confirmed the existence of the Higgs boson. For 10 points,
name this European research organization headquartered in Geneva, the builder of the Large Hadron
Collider.
ANSWER: CERN [or European Organization for Nuclear Research or Organisation Europeenne pour la Recherche Nucleaire]
Because mass of a polytropic star is independent of density, this man was able to relate the mass of a star
with a polytropic index of three to the mass of the sun. With Schonberg, he names the limit on the mass of a
non-fusing, isothermal core. The square of the Hartmann number is this man's number, which represents the
ration of viscosity to the Lorentz force. One analog of his most famous discovery is named after
Oppenheimer, Tolman, and Volkov. One quantity named for this man arises when the gravitational force
balances electron degeneracy pressure. Name this Indian-American astrophysicist best known for stating
that white dwarfs must have a mass less than about 1.4 solar masses to avoid further collapse.
ANSWER: Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar
During World War II this man made contributions in the field of ballistics and published a report
entitled On the Decay of Plane Shock Waves. Most recently, he explained the geometry of Newton's
Principia using arguments from elementary calculus in his 1995 book, (*) Newton's Principia for the
Common Reader while in the 1980s this man was key in developing the theory of the collisions of
gravitational waves. A dimensionless number that bears the name of this man is equal to the square of the
Hartmann number and is defined by the ratio of the Lorentz force to the viscosity of a
hydromagnetodynamic system. This scientist arrived at his most famous contribution by using a 3-polytrope
solution to the Lane-Emden equations for stellar structure in order to model a highly electron degenerate
star. FTP, identify this 20th century Indian-born astrophysicist whose namesake limit gives the 1.4 solar
mass upper limit on the mass of white dwarfs.
ANSWER: Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar
One analog of this concept is named after Tolman, Oppenheimer, and Volkov. Its namesake solved
three cases of the Lane-Emden equation. The denominator of the formula used to calculate it includes
the square of the number of nucleons per electron, and Schonberg's name is sometimes appended to it.
Equal to approximately 1.4 solar masses, for 10 points, name this theoretical maximum mass a white
dwarf can obtain before collapsing in on itself and forming a black hole, a limit named after an Indian
physicist.
ANSWER: Chandrasekhar Limit
One opponent of this quantity tried to adopt the degeneracy formula for high densities, and it includes an
important mu-squared quantity in its denominator. A star exceeding the Roche lobe may have led one body
to violate this. Landau calculated it along with its namesake, and this value is sometimes also named after
Schonberg. The Champagne Supernova violates it, and stars above it become either black holes or neutron
stars. For 10 points, name this quantity of about 1.4 solar masses, the maximum mass a white dwarf can
have, named after an Indian physicist.
ANSWER: Chandrasekhar limit
In 1987, Lieb and Yau proposed an analog of this for boson-composed stars such as axion stars, using a
Hartree-type equation instead of the namesake's. As a consequence of it, main sequence stars larger than
eight solar masses must become neutron stars or black holes. The value for it is thought to be around 1.4
solar masses or 2.96x1030 [2.96 times 10 to the 30th] kilograms, and no white dwarf can be stabilized by
degeneracy pressure beyond it. For 10 points, identify this mass limit named for an Indian astrophysicist.
ANSWER: Schoenberg-Chandrasekhar limit [accept Chandrasekhar after "limit"]
This concept is the non-trivial precondition necessary for proving the Poincare recurrence theorem. Systems
with this property have positive Lyapunov exponents and include some that exhibit fractal characteristics. In
this state, the behavior of the logistic plot briey includes three-cycles, and has period-doubling with a
frequency approaching the Feigenbaum constant. Other examples include the non-linear damping in van der
Pol oscillators and the double pendulum. This theory was inspired by some work regarding the weather
performed by Lorentz. For ten points, name this state experienced by systems extremely sensitive to initial
conditions.
ANSWER: chaos
In systems with this behavior, all open sets of phase space will eventually overlap with one another, due to
topological mixing. By the Poincare-Bendixson theorem, this phenomenon is forbidden in systems with
fewer than 3 phase-space dimensions, because strange attractors cannot form in those systems. Systems with
this property, which requires nonlinear equations of motion, include dynamical billiards, the logistic map,
and the double pendulum. Because systems with this property are highly sensitive to initial conditions, they
are unpredictable yet deterministic. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which the butterfly effect might
occur.
ANSWER: chaos [or word forms]
The presence of this phenomenon is identified by the measurement of exponential divergence, governed by
the Lyapunov exponents. In continuous systems, it can only arise if the equations of motion are nonlinear
and more than two-dimensional, as in the Sinai billiard. The double pendulum exhibits this phenomenon at
intermediate energies. This phenomenon often gives rise to attractors with non-integer dimension known as
"strange", such as the Lorenz attractor. For 10 points, name this deterministic yet unpredictable
phenomenon in which systems are highly sensitive to initial conditions, which could result from a butterfly
flapping its wings in Brazil.
ANSWER: chaos [or word forms]
This phenomenon occurs in the horseshoe map created by Stephen Smale, because almost all
points go to the edge of the square. Systems with a high value of the Lyapunov exponent are more
prone to this phenomenon, which occurs in the figure-eight-shaped diagram of the Lorenz system.
This behavior can be modeled physically with a (*) double pendulum. For 10 points, identify this
property of systems sensitive to small variations in initial conditions, commonly described with the idea of
a butterfly effect causing a hurricane.
ANSWER: chaos [accept word forms like chaotic behavior]
One equation that gives this quantity sets it equal to isospin plus half the sum of baryon number and
strangeness and was developed by Gell-Mann and Nishijima. The quantization of this quantity was
demonstrated in an experiment in which the force of gravity was made to balance the buoyant and
electric forces experienced by a set of (*) oil droplets, which was carried out by Robert Millikan; that
quantum is equal to one over Avogadro's number times the Faraday constant. The electric flux through a
surface is set equal to this quantity enclosed by that surface in Gauss's law. When two bound particles have
opposite signs for this property, an electric dipole is created. For 10 points, name this property measured in
coulombs.
ANSWER: electric charge
The Poisson-Boltzmann equation computes the electrostatic potential given the density of this
quantity; linearization of that equation yields the Debye-Huckel equation. Magnetic force is equal to
this quantity times the cross product of velocity and magnetic field, and the electric flux is equal to this
quantity over epsilon-naught. For 10 points, name this quantity that is measured in coulombs,
symbolized q, and comes in positive and negative forms.
ANSWER: electric charge
For two identical particles, this quantity-squared equals four pi times the permittivity of free space
times the distance between the particles squared times force. The energy stored in a capacitor is
equal to this quantity-squared divided by two times voltage, and the (*) electric dipole moment is equal
to this quantity times distance between the particles. This quantity was shown to be quantized by the
Millikan oil drop experiment, and it is equal to current times time. The letter Q often symbolizes, for ten
points, what quantity measured in Coulombs, which is positive for protons and negative for electrons?
ANSWER: electric charge
For a particle in circular motion in a magnetic field, this quantity equals linear momentum divided by the
product of radius and magnetic field strength. The force of a magnetic field on any particle equals this
quantity times the cross product of velocity and magnetic field. This quantity also equals the force of an
electric field divided by its field strength, and this equals work divided by electric potential difference.
Name this quantity that can be measured in coulombs [koo-lomes].
ANSWER: electric charge
Faraday cages distribute this quantity to cancel external fields. The electric flux density through a closed
surface is proportional to this quantity according to Gauss' (GOWSS-ES) law. It is found squared in the
numerator of Coloumb's (KOO-loms) law. This quantity was measured in an experiment that balanced
gravity and buoyancy. That experiment determined the elementary value of this quantity and was
conducted by Robert Millikan with oil drops. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized Q and equal to
-1.6 times 10 to the -19 for electrons.
ANSWER: electric charge
In 2006, Boyle and Smith were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for the creation of a device,
used in astronomical imaging, that uses photons to build up this quantity. Structures with a non-zero
value for this quantity that are driven along magnetic field lines in the atmosphere are named after
Birkeland. Many particle species with a non-zero value for this quantity combined to form hydrogen
during the epoch of (*) recombination. According to the no-hair theorem, this quantity, mass and angular
momentum are the only properties that characterize a black hole. During the epoch of reionization,
baryonic matter typically acquired a non-zero value for this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity
which is non-zero for ionic species.
ANSWER: electric charge [accept charged coupled devices on the first sentence; accept current until "no-hair" is read]
In electrodynamics, the square of this quantity times acceleration squared can be found in the numerator of
the Larmor formula for power, and this quantity is a proportionality constant in the Lorentz force law. In
circuits, the derivative of this quantity is the current, and the field of electrostatics deals with problems
when this quantity is not moving. Colulomb's law gives that electric force is proportional to this quantity
squared over the distance squared. For 10 points, identify this quantity symbolized "q," which can be
positive or negative and causes objects to attract or repel each other
ANSWER: electric charge [prompt on "q"]
One variety of this property defines eight different types of gluons; hadrons with that type of this property
cannot be isolated or directly observed due to confinement. Unlike that "color" type, the more common
type of this causes a point to be accelerated in proportion to it by the Lorentz force. Its conservation is
assumed by Kirchoff's first circuit rule, and the Millikan oil-drop experiment measured the "elementary"
one. For 10 points, name this property measured in coulombs, whose rate of change is current and which
can be positive or negative.
ANSWER: electric charge [accept color charge until "color" is read]
The reversal of this quantity along with parity and time is symmetric. This quantity equals the
permittivity of space times the integral of electric field over a closed surface. This quantity is
divided by electric potential to calculate capacitance, and energy is divided by this quantity to
calculate electric potential. The elementary amount of this quantity was found in the Millikan oil
drop experiment, and J. J. Thomson measured its ratio to mass for electrons. Two values of this
quantity are multiplied in Coulomb's law, and this quantity is measured in coulombs. Name this
electric quantity that can be positive or negative.
ANSWER: electric charge
In particle physics, an analogue of this quantity is called color. One experiment that determined this
quantity balanced one force with an opposing calculated by using Stokes law for the drag on a sphere.
Kirchhoff's junction rule is based on the conservation of this quantity. The Millikan oil drop experiment
determined this quantity for an electron and this quantity is equal to current multiplied by time. For 10
points, name this quantity denoted with the symbol Q and measured in Coulombs.
ANSWER: electric charge
Fluids with this property are the subject of MHD. The conservation of this quantity is a consequence of
the local gauge invariance of the EM field. The density of this quantity, which is symbolized rho, is divided
by epsilon-sub-naught in one formulation of Gauss's Law. The derivative of this quantity with respect to
time gives the current, and this quantity for the electron was measured in Millikan's oil drop experiment.
For 10 points, name this quantity measured in coulombs.
ANSWER: charge
By Noether's theorem, gauge invariance of an electromagnetic field is the symmetry that leads to the
conservation of this quantity. The sum of the time derivative of the density of this quantity and the
divergence of the current density equals zero by the conservation of this quantity. Electric field equals
electric force over this quantity. The energy stored in a capacitor is one half times voltage times this
quantity, and capacitance is equal to this quantity over voltage. Name this quantity for which an electron has
a negative value and a proton has a positive value.
ANSWER: charge
For a baryon, this quantity is related to Baryon number, isospin, and strangeness according to the GellMann-
Nishijima formula. Dirac showed that the existence of a magnetic monopole would lead to a
quantization of this quantity. A measure for this which is "effectively" felt by a valence electron is used to
calculate electronegativity in the Allred-Rochow scale. Mass, angular momentum, and this are the only
quantities which characterize black holes according to the "no hair" theorem. The flux at the surface of an
arbitrary volume is proportional to this quantity according to Gauss- law for electric fields. For 10 points,
identify this property which is carried by electrons and protons but not neutrons.
ANSWER: electric charge
This quantity is related to isospin by the Gell-Mann-Nishijima equation. The electric flux through a surface
is equal to this quantity over permittivity of space according to Gauss's law, and the time derivative of this
quantity is current. One experiment involving this quantity balanced the buoyant force with the electric
force using oil drops to prove that this quantity is quantized, and that experiment was conducted by Robert
Millikan. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in Coulombs, which is positive for a proton.
ANSWER: Electric Charge
This quantity is expressed in the Gell-Mann-Nishijima formula in terms of baryon number, strangeness, and
isospin. There are "hyper" types of this associated with both the strong and weak nuclear forces. The
derivative of the density of this quantity with respect to time equals the opposite of the flux of current
density. The Faraday constant is equal to the fundamental value of this times Avogadro's constant; that
fundamental value was measured by Robert Millikan's oil-drop experiment, and can be divided by three for
quarks. Name this quantity that may be positive or negative, measured in coulombs.
ANSWER: electric charge
The force experienced by a particle in a magnetic field is equal to this quantity times the cross product of
its velocity and the magnetic field. The force experienced in an electric field is this quantity times the
electric field. The electric flux out of a closed surface is equal to this value over the permittivity of free
space by Gauss's Law. The time derivative of this quantity is current. For 10 points, give this property
measured in coulombs.
ANSWER: electric charge
This quantity equals isospin plus one-half the sum of baryon number, strangeness, charm, bottomness, and
topness, according to the revised Gell-Mann-Nishijima formula for it. This quantity's conservation law can
be written as "del dot J plus d-rho d-t equals zero". Poisson's equation sets the Laplacian proportional to the
negative of the density of this quantity. This quantity collects in opposite values on either side of a
capacitor, and its time-derivative is the current. The electric force between two objects is proportional to the
product of this quantity for each object, according to Coulomb's Law. For 10 points, name this quantity
measured in coulombs, which is positive for a proton.
ANSWER: charge [prompt on Q]
A particle and its antiparticle are identical except for having opposite values of this quantity. Robert
Millikan used drops of oil to measure the smallest isolatable value of it. The force between two
objects with this property, like mass, is (*) inversely proportional to the square of the distance between
them, according to Coulomb's law. Electric current is the movement of this. For 10 points, name this
electric quantity that is positive for protons.
ANSWER: electric charge (or electrostatic charge)
Net electric flux equals this quantity divided by the permittivity according to Gauss's law. The
elementary value for this quantity was determined by balancing the gravitational and electric forces
on an (*) oil drop in an experiment conducted by Millikan. Current is the rate of change of this quantity
with respect to time. The force on a particle is equal to this quantity times the electric field. For 10 points,
identify this quantity measured in Coulombs, which is negative for an electron.
ANSWER: electric charge
The net electric flux through a surface is proportional to this quantity according to Gauss's law.
It was determined to be quantized by an experiment that balanced the buoyant and electric forces.
The force exerted on a particle by a magnetic field is equal to this quantity times (*) velocity cross the
field strength, and current is equal to its negative time derivative. For 10 points, name this quantity
measured in coulombs, which for an electron is negative.
ANSWER: electric charge
In the Dirac-Pauli representation, an operator partially named for this quantity takes the form of i
times the 2nd gamma matrix; that operator doesn-t change helicity, but it flips the sign of all additive
quantum numbers. Lines running from the top left to the bottom right of an Eightfold Way diagram
represent particles with the same value for this quantity. The symmetry named for this quantity is
combined with (*) parity symmetry to form a symmetry violated by the weak force. The value of this
quantity for the electron was determined by a measurement of the falling velocity of oil drops by Robert
Millikan. Equal to two-thirds for the up quark and minus one-thirds for the down quark, for 10 points, name
this quantity which for the electron is minus 1.6 times 10 to the minus 19 coulombs.
ANSWER: electric charge [accept "charge conjugation"]
This quantity is equal to isospin plus the term hypercharge divided by two, according to the Gell-Mann-
Nishijima formula. The net outward flux equals this quantity divided by the permittivity of free space,
according to one of Maxwell's equations. Quarks have a value of positive two-thirds or negative one-third
for this quantity. Kirchhoff's junction rule is an application of the conservation of this quantity, whose time
derivative is current. Collected on the plates of a capacitor, this quantity is often measured in coulombs. For
10 points, name this quantity that is positive for protons and negative for electrons.
ANSWER: electric charge
This quantity is the generator of the U(1) (you-one) symmetry, and the product of it with parity and
time reversal is invariant. For quarks, it takes on non-integer values. Kirchoff's circuit laws deal with the
conservation of this quantity. Faraday's constant quantizes this property for a mole of electrons.
Additionally, the Millikan oil drop experiment determined the value of this property for an electron. For 10
points, name this property that is positive for protons and negative for electrons.
ANSWER: charge
One form of this property, named for Dirac, exists for magnetic monopoles and is symbolized g.
The Cronin-Fitch experiment observed violation of symmetry between this and parity. Color is a
form
of this for the strong force. Kirchoff's junction rule is a consequence of (*) conservation of one form of
it. For 10 points, susceptibility to fundamental forces is governed by what property, the electric variety of
which is symbolized Q and measured in coulombs?
ANSWER: charge
The Lorentz equation describes the force exerted on a mobile one. The density of this at surfaces is
represented by sigma and is equal to the Laplacian of the electric field. It is denoted by the letter Z, and
Gauss's law states the electric flux through a closed surface is proportional to this quantity enclosed by
that surface. Robert Millikan's oil drop experiment measured, for 10 points, what quantity whose time
derivative is current, and whose value for electrons is negative one.
ANSWER: charge [accept charge carriers or particles possessing charge or equivalents]
One variety of these instruments uses a peristaltic-like contraction; that type includes an implant that
generates a large electric field between successive gates. Time-delay integration, a variant of the drift
scanning technique, can be used to correct for flat fielding in these devices. They can be thinned to
allow for backside illumination, which greatly increases their (*) blue band quantum efficiency. These
instruments consist of an epitaxial layer of silicon and can thus use the photoelectric effect to generate holes
or electrons, which are then transferred along an array of capacitors; the resulting voltage can then be read
off to measure the received light intensity. Widely used in astronomy, for 10 points, name these devices
whose invention by George Smith and Willard Boyle netted them half of the 2009 physics Nobel.
ANSWER: charge-coupled devices
Along with non-equilibrium interactions and baryon number violation, this phenomenon is one of the
Sakharov conditions. This phenomenon accounts for the complex phases in the Cabibo-Kobayashi-
Masakawa matrix, and penguin diagrams are used to study it. This phenomenon is studied by the
terminated BteV experiment, the Belle experiment, and other B-factories, while it was originally
discovered in the decay of neutral kaons by Nobel Laureates Cronin and Fitch, though this example was
indirect. This phenomenon is the reason why the universe contains much more matter than antimatter. For
10 points, name this violation of the product of two central particle properties.
ANSWER: CP violation or Charge-parity violation
According to the Witten effect, any grand unified theory which does NOT show this phenomenon has
dyons with only integer charges. The interaction of scalar fields with the instanton field causes this
phenomenon as part of the Affleck-Dine mechanism. When this phenomenon does NOT occur, the
areas of the unitarity triangles vanish. Along with thermal disequilibrium and violation of the baryon
number, this phenomenon is one of the conditions required for (*) baryogenesis according to the
Sakharov conditions. Complex phases in the CKM matrix allow for this phenomenon. In local and Lorentzinvariant quantum field theories, this phenomenon necessitates a flipping of the time-reversal symmetry.
The indirect form of this phenomenon was originally discovered in the decay of neutral kaons by James
Cronin and Val Fitch. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which the product of charge conjugation and
parity symmetry are broken by some process.
ANSWER: CP violation [or charge conjugation and parity until "charge conjugation" is read]
The production of a bound state of this particle and its antiparticle is expected to be suppressed by
quark-gluon plasma formation. A mechanism that suppressed FCNCs required the existence of this particle;
that mechanism was elucidated by Iliopoulous, Maiani and Glashow. That bound state of this particle and
its antiparticle was first found, independently, by groups led by Burton Richter and Samuel Ting. That
discovery of that bound state constituted the November Revolution. That bound state constitutes the only
meson with a two-letter name, the J/psi meson. For 10 points, identify this second generation quark paired
with the strange quark.
ANSWER: charm quark [prompt on quark; prompt on c quark]
The theoretical prediction of this particle was made in a 1970 paper by Glashow, Iliopoulos, and Maiani,
who connected its proposed existence to the number of then-known lepton generations. The schematic
representation of particles incorporating this particle can be seen by extending the baryon decuplet to a
three-dimensional pyramid. Confirmation for the existence of this particle was provided by the discovery of
the D-meson, in which this particle is found with an up or down anti-quark, and the lambda-plus baryon.
The most notable experimental confirmation of this particle's existence was known as the November
Revolution, during which the finding of a bound state of this particle with its anti-particle was confirmed
and eventually named the J/psi meson. For ten points, identify this quark, the fourth to be discovered and
part of the same generation as the "strange" quark.
ANSWER: charm quark
Robin Canup suggests that this body was formed from a giant impact of a Kuiper Belt object. Similar
objects to this entity include Nix and Hydra, and this object was discovered in 1978 by James Christy
when he noticed a periodic bulge in photographs of the body it orbits. This body is located in a system
in which the center of gravity is not located within the object this body orbits, one of the reasons that
orbited body is no longer a planet. For 10 points, name this object that orbits Pluto, named for the
Greek ferryman of the dead.
ANSWER: Charon [accept Pluto I]
This effect occurs when light emission is coupled to radiation modes in photonic crystals using electron
energy loss spectroscopy. Two counters of this type, one containing a quartz medium and the other
containing a liquid fluorocarbon medium, were used to detect the antiproton. This phenomenon can
generate generalized Swihart waves when emitted from an Abrikosov-Josephson vortex and it can be
generated by Josephson fluxons traveling with a phase velocity greater than Jospehson plasma waves in a
junction. The H.E.S.S. and MAGIC telescopes detect it in the form of low energy photons that are given off
by electrons and positrons produced through the atmospheric absorption of gamma rays. For 10 points,
when charged particles travel through an optically transparent medium at speeds faster than the speed of
light in the medium, what type of radiation is given off?
ANSWER: Cherenkov radiation
Silica aerogels are frequently used in devices for measuring this phenomenon, and one such device is called
the threshold detector, while another device used to measure it is called a ring imaging detector. The
governing equation can be derived by using Poynting's theorem and applying the Fourier transform to
determine the energy loss at infinite distance. A periodic grating can give rise to a version of this effect
named after Smith and Purcell, while the Frank-Tamm equation governs this phenomenon, which travels at
an angle whose cosine is inversely proportional to the index of refraction and the object's speed. For 10
points, name this effect in which a charged particle moves through a medium faster than the speed of light
in that medium, giving off radiation.
ANSWER: Cherenkov radiation
The HESS project uses this effect to detect gamma rays, and the orientiation of it relative to the particle
path is used in RICH detectors. The equation governing it states that the energy losses per unit distance are
given as the integral over applicable frequencies of 1- the inverse of beta square times the dielectric
constant. That formula was developed by Ilya Frank and Igor Tamm. Its namesake observed it while he was
working under Vavilov, and it is responsible for the blue glow that can be seen near nuclear reactors. For 10
points, identify this radiation emitted by a body that is traveling faster than the speed of light in that
medium, and is named for a Soviet physicist.
ANSWER: Cerenkov radiation [or Cherenkov radiation]
RICH detectors use this effect to measure the velocity of subatomic particles. In a periodic medium,
such as the surface of a diffraction grating, this effect requires no minimum velocity. Its spectral
intensity is approximately proportional to the frequency, according to the (*) Frank-Tamm formula, so
most of its energy is actually in the UV. Observatories such as IceCube and Super-Kamiokande use this
effect to detect neutrinos. Created when a particle travels through a medium faster than the local speed of
light, for ten points name of this type of radiation characterized by a blue glow in nuclear reactors.
ANSWER: Cherenkov radiation
The IceCube project and its preceding AMANDA project used it to detect neutrino interactions with
the Antarctic ice cap. Objects which detect this analyze the radii of certain "rings" formed by it, and
it can also be observed when the motion occurs over a diffraction pattern, called the Smith-Purcell
effect. The magnitude of this can is proportional to the integral over all frequencies of omega times 1 minus
1 over dielectric constant times beta squared, which is known as the Frank Tamm formula. For 10 points,
name this radiation that occurs when charged particles move through a medium faster than the speed of
light, named for its Russian discoverer.
ANSWER: CHerenkov radiation [or Cherenkov radiation]
The Askaryan effect can generate this phenomenon, whose alteration by a periodic grating is the Smith-
Purcell effect. Hankel functions were utilized by Ilya Frank and Igor Tamm to develop a formula
calculating the intensity of this effect. It occurs when an electromagnetic field in a local medium is
disrupted, releasing photons that constructively interfere and is often considered an analogue of a sonic
boom. For 10 points, name this effect named for its Russian discoverer which occurs when particles
propagate faster than the local speed of light through a medium, generating an oft-seen blue color.
ANSWER: Cherenkov radiation /effect
One device that measures this phenomenon uses a perfluorohexane radiator and measures uses an
image of a 2-dimensional ring produced by it to measure the angle at which it occurs. Water-medium
devices that measure this phenomenon may employ a fluorophore like carbostyril as a wavelength
shifter to improve detection efficiency. (*) Cosmic-ray detectors that use an air medium must reconstruct
the cosmic ray from this phenomenon as produced by the ray's secondaries; such detectors are used in
CRID and VERITAS. The energy emitted in this process per unit length and angular frequency is
proportional to one, minus one over the square of "beta times the index of refraction", according to the
Frank-Tamm formula. For 10 points, name this often-blue radiation emitted by charged particles traveling
faster than the speed of light in their medium.
ANSWER: Cherenkov radiation
Periodic diffraction gratings were found to alter this phenomenon by Smith and Purcell, whose
research led to the development of free electron lasers. The IceTop array at the IceCube Observatory
uses this phenomenon to detect neutrinos. Analogous to a (*) sonic boom, it causes the emission of a
characteristic blue glow, which is often seen in nuclear reactors. It results when a charged particle travels
through a medium faster than the speed of light in the medium. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon
named for a Russian physicist.
ANSWER: Vavilov-Cherenkov radiation [or Vavilov-Cherenkov effect]
It was proposed by Ginsburg as a way to generate microwaves, and is relied on in a variation of liquid
scintillation counting. It can result from the Askaryan effect, and an unusual type of it can exist near a
periodic structure with Bragg scattering, which was confirmed by Smith and Purcell. Its energy is measured
by calculating its cone angle, and its cause was explained by Tamm and Frank. Sometimes found
surrounding the fuel elements of a nuclear reactor, for 10 points, name this blue glowing light that is emitted
when a charged particle travels at a speed greater than the speed of light in a medium.
ANSWER: Cherenkov radiation [or effect or light]
A special case of this effect occurs in the presence of a periodic surface like a diffraction grating, and is
called the Smith-Purcell effect. The Super Kamiokande uses this effect to detect neutrinos, and the amount
of it emitted is given in terms of the permeability and index of refraction of that medium in the Frank Tamm
formula. Often considered the electromagnetic equivalent of a sonic boom, it is emitted when charged
particles move faster than the speed of light in an insulator. For 10 points, identify this radiation that
produces a characteristic blue glow, named for a Russian physicist.
ANSWER: Cherenkov radiation
One tool for analyzing these objects is the star-mesh transform, a generalization of the three-node Ydelta technique. Tellegen's Theorem about these objects can be derived from two other rules, and
certain simplifications of these entities are guaranteed by Norton's and Thevenin's Theorems. A
certain induced quantity for these systems is equal to the derivative of (*) flux with respect to time as it
moves through a magnetic field. The LC variety of these contain inductors and capacitors, and junction and
loop rules named for Kirchhoff can be applied to them. For ten points, identify these electrical networks that
often contain batteries and resistors.
ANSWER: electrical circuits (accept electrical networks before mentioned, prompt on graphs)
An intuitive way to calculate this measure due to Fermi involves knowing the distance and number of
time zones traversed when travelling from New York to Los Angeles. An incorrect value for this
quantity was promulgated by the world maps of (+) Ptolemy, fooling Christopher Columbus. This
quantity was measured by noting the angles of shadows in Syene and Alexandria and then
multiplying the distance between the two cities by fifty. That measurement was performed by (*)
Erastothenes. For 10 points, identify this distance around the third planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: circumference of the Earth
In statistical mechanics, a failure to account for physics not described by this adjective leads to the Gibbs
paradox. The WKB approximation is known as a "semi-this" method because it treats h-bar as a small
parameter, as is the Bohr model of the atom because it treats electrons as point particles. This adjective
describes a limit of the correspondence principle with large quantum numbers, which explains how quantum
physics approaches this kind of physics on a large scale. For 10 points, name this adjective that describes
physics before the development of relativity or quantum physics, such as the kind of mechanics based on
Newton's laws of motion.
ANSWER: classical
One of these objects was part of a thought experiment used by Einstein to develop special relativity. The
development of accurate maritime versions of these devices allowed sailors to easily calculate their
longitude. The electronic transitions of cold cesium-133 and rubidium-87 are used in the atomic type of
these devices. A crystal resonator made of quartz is used in another type of them, which must be very
accurate for GPS to work. For 10 points, name these devices that keep track of time.
ANSWER: clocks [or chronometer]
The alignment of the quadrupole and octopole modes of one measurement of this phenomenon with
the ecliptic plane is amusingly referred to as the "axis of evil." Recent studies of this phenomenon
include MAXIMA, which split off from the similar BOOMERANG experiment. The FIRAS
experiment studied its anisotropies using the COBE satellites, while (*) WMAP measures its
temperature. First predicted by George Gamow, it was discovered accidentally by Robert Wilson and Arno
Penzias in 1964. Corresponding to a nearly perfect blackbody, for 10 points, identify this radiation left
over from the Big Bang with a temperature of about two point seven Kelvin.
ANSWER: CMBR [or Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation]
Doroshkevich and Novikov wrote an article suggesting a search for this phenomenon, although the
first detection of it had happened three months earlier. The Kompaneets equations describes
scattering of this phenomenon, and the integrated gravitational shift seen in this maps the evolution
of gravity wells; those distortions are named for (*) Sunyaev-Zel'dovich and Sachs-Wolfe. Its primary
dipole anisotropy is caused by the velocity of the Milky Way, and higher order multipole terms are used to
study inflation and recombination. Discovered at the Bell Labs by winners of 1978 Nobel Prize, Penzias
and Wilson, this phenomenon is currently mapped by WMAP and COBE and it fits a blackbody spectrum at
2.7 Kelvin. For 10 points, this is what radiation permeating the entire universe, often regarded as a
conclusive evidence for the Big Bang?
ANSWER: cosmic microwave background radiation [accept CMBR]
Some of the first evidence for this phenomenon was seen in an observed excitation of the cyanogen radical.
It experiences a diffusion damping named for Silk. Using the Kompaneets equation, it can be shown how
electrons scatter this in an inverse Compton Effect. The effect of gravitational potential perturbation on this
phenomenon is known as the Sachs-Wolfe effect, and this anisotropy shows fluctuations in density from the
time of recombination. It was discovered at Bell Labs by Penzias and Wilson and it has a temperature of
about 2.7 Kelvin. For 10 points, name this blackbody radiation left over from the time around the big bang
that permeates the universe.
ANSWER: CMBR [or CMBR; or Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation]
One damping process in this phenomenon is characterized by a suppression factor that is an integral
with respect to the conformal time, is mediated by diffusion, and is named for Silk. B-mode
polarization in this phenomenon is relatively suppressed since vector perturbations due to plasma
vorticity are negligible because of post-inflation damping. The temperature of this phenomenon was
first suggested by an excited rotational mode in CN. Rees et al derived a nonlinear second-order
correction to this phenomenon which would be caused by time-varying gravitational fields; the
largest contributor to that correction is probably the Great Attractor. It was created after (*)
recombination at the surface of last scattering, and anisotropies in it were mapped by the WMAP probe For
10 points, name this relic of the big bang, an almost-uniform background of blackbody radiation.
ANSWER: cosmic microwave background radiation [or cosmic microwave background radiation; or CBR or CMB or MBR; prompt on partial answer]
This phenomenon is being measured to determine whether or not there are bubble universes, and one of the
instruments used to study this is the Planck Spacecraft. Detected with anisotropy probes, this was created at
about the same time as the first hydrogen atoms, less than a million years after the Big Bang. Discovered by
Arno Penzias and Robert Woodrow Wilson in 1964, the existence of this phenomenon severely weakened
Steady State theories of the universe. Name this radiation used to give credence to the Big Bang Theory that
gives the universe a temperature around 2.7 Kelvins.
ANSWER: Cosmic Microwave Background (Radiation) (accept CMB, CMBR, CBR, MBR or relic radiation)
It displays a gravitational redshift that occurs either as particles enter and exit potential wells that
stretch over time or at the surface of last scattering. Below about 218 gigahertz, its intensity falls
due to interactions with high-energy electrons in an effect used to find galaxy clusters. Those
phenomena cause anisotropies in this entity, once studied by COBE and now by WMAP. This
phenomenon has a thermal black-body spectrum equivalent to about with a peak frequency of 160.2
gigahertz, giving a temperature of two point seven Kelvin. For 10 points, name this ubiquitous
electromagnetic phenomenon, named for the part of the spectrum where it shows up, the residue of the Big
Bang.
ANSWER: CMBR [or cosmic microwave background radiation]
In this entity, the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect is the result of inverse Compton scattering. The
WMAP and COBE satellites studied this entity which was first observed by AT&T scientists Arno
Penzias and Robert Wilson when they were trying to fix an early microwave satellite receiver.
Observations of its near perfect (*) blackbody spectrum place the temperature of the universe at about 2.7
Kelvin. For 10 points, name this all pervasive entity, often described as the "echo" of the big bang.
ANSWER: CMBR [or cosmic microwave background radiation; or background radiation]
The ecliptic alignment of the anisotropy (an-ICE-uh-trop-ee) in this entity could violate the
Copernican principle. This entity is linearly polarized due to Thomson scattering. The gravitational
redshift of photons from this entity is described by the Sachs-Wolfe effect. Its origins lie in the
recombination epoch, when photons (*) decoupled from matter. It has been mapped by WMAP and
COBE and was discovered by Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias at Bell Labs. For 10 points, name this
radiation with a temperature of 2.7 degrees Kelvin that permeates the universe and is a residual of the Big
Bang.
ANSWER: CMBR [or cosmic microwave background radiation; or relic radiation]
The MAT/TOCO [MATT-TOKO] experiment located the first acoustical peak in this phenomenon, which
experiences a temperature increase in the direction of motion due to dipole anisotropy. Gravitational
redshift in this phenomenon is called the Sachs-Wolfe effect, and the COBE satellite precisely measured its
black body spectrum. This phenomenon was predicted by George Gamow in 1948, though its interference
with the Telstar satellite's communications would lead to its accidental discovery by Arno Penzias and
Robert Wilson. Having a density of about 400 photons per cubic centimeter and a temperature of about 2.7
kelvins, name this radiation that permeates the entire universe, a remnant of the Big Bang.
ANSWER: cosmic microwave background radiation [accept CMBR; accept the words or corresponding letters in other orders as long as all are still present; prompt on a partial answer]
The gravitational redshift of its photons can be described as "integrated" or non-integrated depending on
where the last scattering occurs and is known as the Sachs-Wolfe Effect, while the influence of electrons
on it through inverse Compton scattering is known as the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect. COBE studies the
anisotropy of this phenomenon while WMAP measures its temperature. It was hypothesized by George
Gamow, and its accidental discovery by Arno Penzias, and Robert Wilson in 1964 was a major blow to the
Steady State model of the Universe. For 10 points, name this feature remnant of the Big Bang, whose
temperature is about 2.7 Kelvins.
ANSWER: Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation [Prompt on Partial Answers; prompt on "SachsWolfe effect" until mentioned]
Kinematic variations in this due to the Ostriker-Vishniac and Sunyaev Zeldo'vich effects causes
distortion that can be used to map galaxies. This was first predicted by Alpher, Herman, and
Gamow and first observed by Wilson and Penzias at Bell Labs. It is observed to have a redshift of
over one thousand, and is the most perfectly measured blackbody known to science with a
temperature of (*) 2.7 Kelvin. WMAP and KOBE have created precise measurements of this, which
reveals anisotropies of the early universe because this is the echo of recombination soon after the Big Bang.
For 10 points, name this radiation coming from all directions in the universe.
ANSWER: Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation [accept CMBR]
This phenomenon was studied by a series of high-altitude balloons fitted with bolometers in the
BOOMERANG experiment. The effect of inverse Compton scattering on this phenomenon is termed the
Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect. The effect of gravitational potentials on it is given by the ordinary and integrated
forms of the Sachs-Wolfe effect, and its temperature was measured by WMAP. Affected by late time and
primary anisotropies, it emits a thermal black body spectrum, and the 1978 Nobel Prize was awarded to its
co-discoverers, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson. For ten points, name this widespread radiation that is a
remnant of the Big Bang.
ANSWER: cosmic microwave background radiation (or CMBR)
The B-mode polarization of this phenomenon originates from gravitational lensing of E-modes or gravity
waves from inflation. The discovery of this phenomenon confirmed the nucleosynthesis model of Alpher,
Bethe, and Gamow. It originated during a 300,000-year period called the Dark Ages, and it was discovered
by Wilson and Penzias. Seeming to emit from the Surface of Last Scattering, its anisotropy was observed by
the COBE ("CO"-"bee"), WMAP ("W"-"map"), and Planck satellites. It appears to echo the Big Bang in a
namesake low frequency band. For 10 points, name this ubiquitous 2.7 Kelvin radiation source.
ANSWER: Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation [accept CMBR or CMR; also accept any answer that includes the words cosmic and radiation, and either microwave or background]
The energy of this process is given by a power law of temperature to the 19.9. The products of this
process are mixed in the second dredge-up. The cores of entities in the upper portion of the main
sequence is dominated by convection driven by this process. This process produces 26.8 MeV of
energy, along with 3 gamma rays, two positrons, and three electron neutrinos. This process becomes
dominant at a temperature of around 17 million kelvin and in stars greater than 1.3 (*) solar masses,
and in this process, four protons fuse together to form a helium atom. It is sometimes named for Bethe and
Wiesczaker. Minor branches of this process create fluorine-18 and fluorine-19 along with its namesake
elements. For 10 points, name this stellar nucleosynthesis reaction that dominates over the proton-proton
chain in heavier stars, named for the three elements that comprise it.
ANSWER: CNO cycle [or carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycle; prompt on stellar "nucleosynthesis" or "fusion"]
A pin on a disc tribometer can be used to measure it. It does not change based upon the mass of the
substances used or the shape of substance used, but only varies between combinations of substances.
Common experiments for finding it generally have a block on a surface attached to a mass on a pulley over
the ledge of the table, and a small force is applied in the direction of the pulley until the block slides at
constant velocity. The small push serves to overcome the threshold point, after which static friction is no
longer applicable. FTP, name this constant that equals the force applied divided by the normal force for a
moving surface.
ANSWER: Coefficient of kinetic friction (accept similar, prompt on Coefficient of Friction, prompt on mu-sub-k)
Current research involving this phenomenon focuses on using phenanthrene to fuel energy-producing LENR
devices, and a muon-catalyzed version of this phenomenon is widely accepted. A team led by Nathan Lewis
failed to verify the existence of this phenomenon, a finding that contradicted the Trombay experiments. The
original experiment that claimed to produce this phenomenon involved the electrolysis of heavy water using
a palladium catalyst and was performed by Fleischmann and Pons. For 10 points, name this discredited
phenomenon that allegedly produced energy and helium from hydrogen near room temperature.
ANSWER: cold fusion
A proposed device of this kind was to be directed by Roy Schwitters; that project was located near
Waxahachie, Texas but was cancelled in 1993. The November Revolution was partly due to Burton
Richter's work at one of these devices at Stanford. These devices use a standard of five-sigma for
discovery, and one of these devices found a resonance at 126 electron-volts that correspond to the Higgs
boson. For ten points, name these devices that include the Tevatron at Fermilab and CERN's LHC, which
smash particles together at very high speeds.
ANSWER: particle collider [or particle accelerator; or particle detector]
Spacecraft using the gravity-assist or slingshot method are making use of a form of this event
without contact. A different form of this event occurs in the modeling of a ballistic pendulum.
Another modeling of this event comes from the double ball drop. These situations include events in which two
objects remain (*) separate and those in which objects stick together, known as elastic and inelastic. For 10
points, name this event generally modeled by two spheres with different momentums or directions hitting
one another.
ANSWER: collisions [or elastic collisions; or inelastic collisions]
A 1969 study by Brent Berlin and Paul Kay claimed that there were only eleven universal terms to
describe this characteristic. Ewald Herring developed the "opponent-process theory" to describe perception
of this characteristic. That theory differs from one developed by Thomas Young and revised by Helmholtz,
which says that this characteristic is initially perceived by S, M, and L cells. Metamers cannot be
distinguished on the basis of this characteristic despite having different spectra. The Ishihara test is used to
identify people who have its namesake "blindness." This characteristic is described by saturation,
brightness, and hue. For 10 points, name this property of light, whose perception is described by the
trichromatic theory.
ANSWER: color
If not for this property's introduction, omega-minus baryons would violate the Pauli exclusion principle.
This property actually increases with distance from the particles that possess it. It changes when a quark
gives off a gluon, and combines with its anti- variety to form mesons. Particles with this property cannot be
isolated, its namesake confinement. This quantity can have three values, which can combine neutrally to
form a baryon, while particles without this property are known as leptons and are not subject to the strong
nuclear force. Name this property possessed by gluons and quarks, studied in quantum chromodynamics.
ANSWER: color charge
The Giotto probe studied one body of this type, and confirmed that they typically have albedos
below 4%. An early model for the composition of these bodies is the "Gravel Bank" model, and their
composition was studied by the (*) "Deep Impact" probe. The cloud of gas around them is known as a
coma, and their tails point in the direction of the solar wind. Many of these objects originate in the Oort
Cloud. For 10 points, name these astronomical bodies, which are commonly called "dirty snowballs."
ANSWER: comets
One group of these objects is named after Heinrich Kreutz. A transparent, silicon-based solid known
as aerogel is used to collect samples of these objects. They can be divided into Type I and Type II
depending on the nature of their (*) coma. These objects are divided into short-period, which come
from the Kuiper Belt, and long-period, which come from the Oort Cloud. For 10 points, name these
astronomical objects often described as "dirty snowballs," the most famous of which is named after
Edmond Halley.
ANSWER: comets
In 1986, the Giotto space probe was launched to study these phenomena, such as the
Grigg-Skjellerup one. NASA's Stardust probe found the amino acid glycine in one of these named
Wild 2. These phenomena's atmospheres give their name to a parabolic aberration in which off-axis
point sources are distorted. When earth passes by one named Swift-Tuttle, the Perseid meteor
shower occurs. One of these named (*) Shoemaker-Levy 9 crashed into Jupiter in 1994. Long period ones
may originate from the Oort Cloud. They are characterized by a core called the nucleus and a thin
atmosphere referred to as a coma. For 10 points, name these "dirty snowballs" of the Solar System, one of
which is named for Edmund Halley.
ANSWER: comets
The Kreutz group of these objects are a family of sun-grazing ones. A fragment of one of these
objects is suggested as a cause of the Tunguska event. The debris from outgassing in these objects
leads to meteor showers. One of these objects crashed into (*) Jupiter in 1994. These objects have
features such as a pair of tails of dust and of ionized gas, an atmosphere called a "coma," and a nucleus of
rock and ice. For 10 points, name these objects, which include Shoemaker-Levy 9, Hale-Bopp, and Halley's.
ANSWER: comets
The fragments of one of these celestial objects named for Kreutz have orbits that "graze" the Sun.
One of these objects named for Encke has a period of only 3.3 years, and fragments from another of
these objects become (*) Perseid meteors. Solar radiation creates a dusty coma around these bodies; the
solar wind then acts on that dust, forming a tail. For 10 points, name these small bodies of ice and rock, one
of which is named for Edmund Halley.
ANSWER: comet (prompt on (Kreutz) sungrazer(s) before mentioned)
Heinrich Kreutz is the namesake of a family of these objects, and Fred Whipple devised a model of them.
One of these objects was studied by the Deep Impact mission, and another was studied by the Giotto
mission. One of these objects collided with Jupiter in 1994, and another named Swift-Tuttle is responsible
for the Perseid meteor shower. The long-period type of these objects comes from the Oort cloud, and the
short-period type comes from the Kuiper belt. For 10 points, name these celestial objects, examples of
which include Shoemaker-Levy 9 and Hale-Bopp.
ANSWER: comets
The LINEAR one of these objects showed evidence of spontaneous splitting. They have been
shown to have CHON particles. The Kreutz Group of them are (*) sungrazers. These objects are often
described using the Whipple model. Long period ones are believed to originate in the Oort Cloud. Their
main body is called the nucleus, while the gases and dust make up the coma and tail. For 10 points, name
these small icy bodies that have a highly elliptical orbit around the sun, famous examples of which include
Hale-Bopp and one named for Halley.
ANSWER: comets
The JPC type of this astronomical object is active over a lifetime of about 10,000 years. Their most
prominent features may be lost due to magnetic reconnection, and are formed due to radiation
pressure and the solar wind; as a result, those features always point away from the sun. It is now
believed that these objects are the source of a significant fraction of the Earth's water, and one
named for (*) Shoemaker and Levy recently crashed into Jupiter. Long period and short period ones are
thought to originate in the Kuiper belt and Oort cloud respectively. For 10 points, name these astronomical
entities that consist of dust, rocky particles and ice.
ANSWER: Comets
Two of these objects, including Grigg-Skjellerup [SKEL-leh-rupp], were closely approached by the Giotto
[JOE-toe] probe. Twenty-one of these objects were discovered by Wilhelm Tempel. The scientific names of
one of these bodies uses the letter P if it is periodic or D if it no longer exists. One series of these was
named Shoemaker- Levy. Long-period examples are believed to originate in the Oort cloud. When these
objects pass near the Sun, they often get dust or plasma tails. Name these objects, the mostfamous of which
is Halley's.
ANSWER: comets
As photon energy decreases, its cross section uniformly increases as it approaches the Thomson value and
since no loop diagram is involved, it is susceptible to classical treatment and belongs to the second order
graphs in Feynman diagrams. For low-energy photons perpendicular to the beam direction the differential
cross section of this process obtained from the Klein-Nishina formula demonstrates almost symmetric
scattering. For an electron moving at the speed of light, the scattered wavelength is the de Broglie
wavelength. For 10 points, name this effect, the decrease in the energy of gamma rays or x-rays that interact
with matter.
ANSWER: Compton effect
A type of dual-energy densitometry based on this effect is used to measure the strength of
bone. A method of using this technique to measure profiles adds a term containing the zcomponent
of momentum. One formula governing this process can be corrected for radiation
pressure by multiplying by the Breit-Dirac factor. In the original experiment demonstrating this
effect, the secondary peak grew as the angle was increased. The shift generated by this effect is
equal to quantity one minus cosine theta times h over mc, which is why h over mc is often called
this effect's namesake "wavelength". In the low-energy limit, this process becomes Thompson
scattering. For 10 points, name this effect in which a photon loses energy when it bounces off an
electron.
ANSWER: Compton effect [or Compton scattering]
This process was responsible for making the universe opaque before the era of reionization, and
during large-scale structure formation this process is responsible for balancing out accretion heating
in a namesake form of cooling. In a scintillator, this process is responsible for cutting off the
spectrum just past the double- and single-escape peaks. Around 218 GHz in the spectrum of the
CMB, a form of this effect is responsible for boosting the energy of the CMB (*) photons; that inverse
form of that effect is name for Sunayev and Zeldovich. In the high-frequency limit, the shift due to this
process is equal to quantity one minus cosine theta times h over mc, and this process typically occurs when
gamma rays pass through matter. For 10 points, name this effect in which high energy photons lose energy
when colliding with an electron.
ANSWER: Compton scattering [accept Sunayev-Zeldovich effect or SZ effect until mention]
Its inverse variety results in photons gaining energy and the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect due to distortions of
the cosmic microwave background radiation. This effect is observed when a high-energy photon collides
with a target that contains loosely-bound electrons on its outer shell. The x-rays scattered from these
electrons have a longer wavelength than that of the incident photon, and this shift in wavelength increases
with the scattering angle. FTP, name this effect that lent further support to the idea of wave-particle duality.
ANSWER: Compton effect
The namesake suppression of this effect is designed to counteract the namesake edge, which is the highest
energy at which false spectra are obtained due to incomplete detection. A related effect can be broken
down to include the Ostriker-Vishniac effect and has been used to observe dense galaxy clusters through
perturbations of the CMB. That effect, the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich, is the inverse of this process, which has its
differential cross section described by the Klein-Nishina formula and includes a constant known as its
wavelength. For 10 points, name this effect in which the namesake shift describes the change in wavelength
of a photon colliding with an electron.
ANSWER: Compton effect or scattering or shift, etc.
In 2008, Laurent Schoeffel examined the prospects of using the 'deeply virtual- form of this effect in
nucleon tomography, and sodium iodide scintillators are used to counteract its namesake 'edge- in
spectrophotometry. It is mathematically governed by the Klein-Nishima formula, and the inverse form of it
is believed to explain the spectrum of accretion disks surrounding black holes. In addition, distortions in the
cosmic microwave background radiation are described by an inverse variety of it called the Sunayev-
Zeldovich effect. Inducing a wavelength shift proportional to one minus the cosine of theta, FTP, identify
this effect which occurs when an x-ray or gamma ray photon scatters as it interacts with matter.
ANSWER: Compton scattering
The Kompaneets equation describes the time evolution of the energy distribution of particles that have
participated in this process. The y-parameter was introduced by Sunyaev and Zeldovich, who studied the
inverse type of this phenomenon in the cosmic microwave background. The Klein-Nishina formula
calculates the differential cross section for this phenomenon, which reduces to a Thomson process in the
limit of low photon energies. The change in wavelength that occurs in this process depends as the cosine of
the angular change of the affected photon's direction. FTP identify this process in which a photon collides
with an electron, resulting in a decrease in its energy.
ANSWER: Compton effect or scattering
This effect's inverse form can be described using the Kompaneets equation, and Faust and Johnson
described its multiple form. In describing this effect, its namesake created a namesake wavelength of a
particle defined as Planck's constant divided by the product of the particle's mass and the speed of light.
That inverse form, which results from the scattering of CMB photons, is known as the Sunyaev-Zel-dovich
effect. The differential cross-section of this effect is calculated for higher wavelengths of the Klein-Nishina
formula, and is the higher-wavelength version of visible light's Thomson scattering. For 10 points, name
this form of scattering in which a photon loses energy when it collides with matter.
ANSWER: Compton scattering or effect
Variables from the Kompaneets equation can be transformed to its namesake y-parameter. The inverse of
this effect causes the intensity of CMB radiation to be distorted when measured in the direction of a cluster
of galaxies, which is known as the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect, and the quantum mechanical version of its
cross section can be described by the Klein-Nishina formula. Discovered by using a molybdenum target, a
graphite block, and a Bragg spectrometer with a calcite crystal, it is equal to the Thomas variety in non-
relativistic cases. For 10 points, name this effect associated with the scattering of x rays by free electrons.
ANSWER: Compton effect/scattering
The edge named for this phenomenon describes the feature of a spectograph caused by it, and its namesake
suppression counteracts that edge. Dense galactic clusters perturb the Cosmic Microwave Background
Radiation through an inverse form of this, the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect. Plank's constant divided by a
particle's rest mass times the speed of light gives its namesake wavelength, and the derivative of its cross-
section is given by the Klein-Nishina formula. For 10 points, name this effect which describes a decrease in
the wavelength of a photon when it collides with an electron, an American physicist's namesake scattering.
ANSWER: Compton Scattering, Effect, etc.
Sodium iodide scintillators are often used to counter the appearance of false peaks in gamma ray spectra ,
which is called this phenomenon's namesake edge. At higher frequency, its differential cross section is
calculable by the Klein-Nishina formula. Planck's constant divided by rest mass times speed of light gives
the wavelength named for this effect. That wavelength is multiplied by 1 minus cosine of the angle of
scattered photons to give the shift in wavelength following this type of scattering. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon, a photon's decrease in wavelength and increase in energy when it collides with an electron,
named after an American physicist.
ANSWER: Compton effect/scattering
This effect produces a wavelength shift proportional to one minus the cosine of the incident angle, and
when this effect occurs in a scintillation detector, it produces a peak known as its namesake edge. Its
differential cross-section is proportional to one-half times the classical electron radius squared, a result
known as the Klein-Nishina Formula. For 10 points, name this type of scattering in which an X-ray or
gamma-ray photon bounces off of an atomic electron, named for an American physicist.
ANSWER: Compton Effect
An equation for this process is corrected by multiplying by the Breit-Dirac recoil factor, raised to the
second or third power, to account for radiation pressure. An important parameter for this process is
equal to Planck's constant over a particle's rest mass times the speed of light. CMBR photons gain
energy in the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect, which is an example of the inverse type of this process. At
higher energies, the differential cross-section of this process can be calculated using the Klein-Nishina
formula while at lower energies, an analog of it named for Thomson occurs. The wavelength change for this
relativistic, inelastic process depends only on the angle of scattering. For 10 points, identify this type of
scattering, named for an American physicist, in which a photon is scattered by a charged particle.
ANSWER: Compton effect [or Compton scattering; or inverse Compton effect until "inverse type" is read]
This effect results in the formation of a namesake edge during gamma ray spectroscopy, which is countered
by its namesake suppression. The Klein Nishina formula gives the differential cross section as a result of
this effect, and its inverse, the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect, occurs when electrons lose energy in the presence
of the cosmic background. Commonly occurring for X-rays or gamma rays, for 10 points, identify this
effect, the increase in wavelength of a photon upon colliding with an electron, a type of scattering named for
an American physicist.
ANSWER: Compton effect or scattering
Parton distributions can be calculated using the deeply virtual form of this effect. In this effect, the
wavelength shift is proportional to one minus the cosine of the angle. Escape of particles undergoing this
effect in a scintillator results in a spurious downward peak in the spectrum. Electrons in the gas
surrounding galaxies cause CMB photons to undergo an inverse version of this effect, which is used to map
clusters. The proportionality constant h over mc is the namesake wavelength of a particle undergoing this
process, which is equal to the rest mass-energy of the particle. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which a photon is inelastically scattered off an electron, causing its wavelength to decrease.
ANSWER: Compton scattering [or Compton effect]
If there is no aberration, any light traveling parallel to the principal axis that reflects from a
mirror of this type will later pass through the focal point. An object placed beyond the focal length
for a mirror of this type will form an inverted, real image. Because lenses of this type always
produced a smaller, virtual images, those lenses are used to correct nearsightedness. Lenses of this
type are thinner in the (*) middle than at the edges. For 10 points, identify this term that denotes a type of
mirror opposite from convex.
ANSWER: concave mirror [or concave lens; or converging mirror; or diverging lens; prompt on converging; prompt on diverging]
The ratio of the effects of shear in a viscous fluid to this process is known as Brinkman's number. The
ratio of the resistance to this process between a body's surface and its interior is given as the Biot
number. In engineering, the U-value measures a material's propensity to engage in this process, while
in metals propensity toward this process is explained by the delocalization of phonons. One law
describing this process sets the local flux of one quantity equal to negative k times the (*) temperature
gradient and is named for Charles Fourier. For 10 points, name this process by which heat is transferred
through a continuous substance, contrasted with radiation and convection.
ANSWER: heat conduction [accept word forms; prompt on "heat transfer"]
The ratio of proportionality constants for two different processes with this name are connected by
the Lorenz number according to the Wiedemann-Franz law. In lumped system analyses of the
transient form of this process, a number proportional to the internal resistance to this process, the
Biot number, is used. If there is no internal energy conversion, the steady-state form of this process is
described by Laplace's equation. The flux due to this process is equal to minus a proportionality
constant - often abbreviated k - times the gradient of (*) temperature according to Fourier's law. For 10
points, name this mode of heat transfer that occurs by microscopic means - without macroscopic motion of
a material - as opposed to convection and radiation.
ANSWER: thermal conduction [or word forms; prompt on heat transfer; prompt on heat transport]
A transient form of this phenomenon is often modeled using lumped system analysis. The transientline source method or laser-flash method is used to calculate the ability of a material to undergo this
process. Values of less than 0.1 for the Biot number imply this process is dominating, and the ratio of
the rate of this process to energy storage is given by the (*) Fourier number. In solids, this process
occurs via free-electron diffusion and phonon vibration. The rate of this process is equal to the negative k of
the temperature gradient in Fourier's law of this process. For 10 points, name this process that competes
with radiation and convection, a form of heat transfer that occurs within a solid.
ANSWER: heat conduction [prompt on transport, transfer or heat transfer before mention]
The ratio of two types of this property equals the product of the Lorenz number and temperature by the
Wiedemann-Franz Law. The first of those types is, for phonons, equal to one-third times the specific heat
per unit volume times the velocity times the average mean free path; it is also the coefficient of
proportionality in Fourier's Law. At a fixed temperature, the second of those types is equal to the length
divided by the product of the cross-sectional area and resistance, or alternatively, one over the resistivity.
For 10 points, thermal and electrical are two types of what property of a material, the degree to which it
allows heat or current to pass through it?
ANSWER: conductivity [accept thermal conductivity or electrical conductivity; prompt on kappa; prompt on k; prompt on sigma]
Because applying a phase to the wavefunction in the Dirac Lagrangian leaves the Lagrangian unchanged, it
follows that this statement is a direct consequence of gauge symmetry, in accordance with Noether's
theorem. Classically, this statement is derived by taking the divergence of both sides of Ampere's law and
noting that the divergence of the electric field is the current density. This yields a continuity equation setting
the time-derivative of the density to the divergence of the current. A direct consequence of this statement is
Kirchhoff's Current Rule, which states that current flows into and out of a node sum to zero. For 10 points,
identify this statement according to which a certain fundamental quantity can neither be created nor
destroyed.
ANSWER: law of conservation of electric charge
In relativity, this statement is equivalent to setting the covariant derivative of the Faraday tensor
to zero. This statement follows from the gauge invariance of the electromagnetic field. One method of
deriving this statement is to take the divergence of both sides of Ampere's law. Applying the
continuity equation to the current density yields this result. Implications of this statement include
Kirchhoff's junction (*) rule, which states that the total current flowing into a junction equals the total
current out, and the fact that a neutral atom emitting an electron will become positive. This concept is
demonstrated by rubbing a glass rod with a piece of fur. For 10 points, identify this statement that the
number of coulombs in a volume remains unchanged.
ANSWER: conservation of electric charge [or equivalent answers like charge conservation; prompt on "continuity equation" before mention]
It can be extended to general relativity by means of the Landau-Lifshitz pseudotensor. Noether's theorem
says that the shift symmetry of time implies it. In order for it to hold for a system, the Lagrangian must be
scleronomic and the potential energy cannot be velocity dependent. This principle limits the range of the
nuclear force by limiting how far the pions that mediate it can travel at the speed of light while violating it.
Equivalently, if the Hamiltonian of a system is constant, then this property holds for the system. For 10
points, name this law of physics, a special case of the conservation of invariant mass in special relativity.
ANSWER: Conservation of energy
This principle is directly equivalent to the time-invariance of a system's dynamics, which is why it is locally
but not globally true on a cosmological level. Early evidence for this principle came from an experiment in
which a falling weight was used to heat up a container of water, performed by Joule. This principle proves
that so-called "over-unity" devices do not exist. One version of this statement describes the change in
internal energy as being the sum of heat input and work done. That version is the first law of
thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this fundamental principle of physics, which states that the total
amount of energy in a closed system is constant.
ANSWER: conservation of energy [or conservation of mass-energy; accept first law of thermodynamics before it is read]
This principle can be obtained from the current density associated with an electric field using the
Poynting theorem. A system with time translation symmetry also exhibits it according to Noether's
theorem. Special relativity expanded this principle to account for mass increases that occur at relativistic
speeds. When it encompasses thermal, potential, and kinetic contributions, it is expressed in the first
law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this principle of physics, which states that the total energy
of a closed system will remain constant.
ANSWER: conservation of energy [prompt on first law of thermodynamics]
A form of this may be derived for a system of particles by taking the ensemble average of the second
velocity moment of a general particle system's corresponding Klimontovich equation. (*) Noether's
theorem dictates that this holds for a system whose governing equation is form invariant under continuous
point time transformation groups. Familiar forms of it for various systems include Poynting's theorem,
Bernoulli's equation, and the first law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, give the general physical term for
the statement that a system's ability to do work does not vary.
ANSWER: conservation of energy [accept close equivalents the first law of thermodynamics before it's mentioned; accept energy equations]
The reason that the sigma star plus particle doesn-t decay into a proton and a neutrino is due to one of these
proposed by Heisenberg. That one only applies in strong interactions and was made to explain the
similarities between the neutron and proton. Another one of these is due to the fact that phase shift of a
wavefunction can-t be observed, while a different one of these must exist due to the invariance of the
Lagrangian to position. With any given symmetry, a corresponding one of these exists according to
Noether's theorem, yet another one of these applies when there is no external torque. Inelastic collisions
require two of these for motion calculation, while elastic collisions require only one. Important ones include
ones for angular momentum, linear momentum, energy, and charge. For 10 points, name these laws that say
that certain quantities remains constant in a system.
ANSWER: conservation laws [accept conservation of baryon number in the first two sentences]
Noether's theorem relates physical action with one of these types of principles. The Hamiltonian in
mechanics can be used to refer to a principle of this type. One scientific principle of this type allows
for the center of mass to travel with a predictable path, despite internal forces, while another type of
this principle occurs because the sum of kinetic and potential types of a certain quantity is always
equal. For ten points, name these laws, which apply to momentum, energy and mass, in which a system as a
whole does not change in quantity.
ANSWER: Laws of Conservation
In 1975, Vujanovic extended Noether's theorem to this type of system, and the presence of a term
proportional to the quantity "x-squared minus one" results in the Van der Pol oscillator not being this type
of system. These systems have Hamiltonians that do not explicitly depend on time, and Helmholtz
decomposition shows that one negative term can represent this type of field. Fields of this type have no curl,
and can be described as the gradient of a scalar potential. For 10 points, identify this adjective which refers
to systems in which the amount of work done is independent of the path, and describes fields such as the
gravitational and electric fields in which no energy is lost.
ANSWER: conservative
This term describes systems for which the Euler-Lagrange equation reduces to Newton's second law, and
Helmholtz's theorem decomposes any force field into a solenoidal one and one with this property. The line
integral around a closed loop is zero for this type of force, whose fields are irrotational, which means their
curl is zero. These forces can be represented as the gradients of potential energy functions. Exemplified by
gravity but not friction, name this type of force whose work is path-independent.
ANSWER: conservative forces [accept conservative (force) fields; accept conservative vector fields; accept irrotational fields before "irrotational"; accept curl-free or other answers logically equivalent to having zero curl before "irrotational"]
One variety of this phenemonon is named for Rayleigh and Benard. For objects with cylindrical geometrics
and freely developing boundary layers, the Churchill-Bernstein equations can be used to calculate the
Nusselt numbers for this process. The Grashof number describes the tendency towards it and is multiplied
by the Prandtl number to obtain the Reynolds number. Divided into free and advective types, for 10 points,
name this type of heat transfer, marked by bulk motion and contrasted with conduction.
ANSWER: Convection
The polytropic relation for this process has exponent five-thirds. In stars, this process should occur
when the Brunt-Vaisala frequency is imaginary. This process occurs when the temperature gradient
is larger than quantity one minus one over gamma, the ratio of specific heats, times temperature over
pressure, time the gradient of the pressure, according to the Schwarzschild criterion. The photosphere
of the Sun is dotted by granules due to this process, which names the zone that surrounds the radiative zone.
Newton's law of cooling describes this process. For 10 points, identify this process of heat transfer by
movement of molecules in a fluid or plasma, as opposed to conduction or advection.
ANSWER: convection
A measure of the amount of energy available for this process is CAPE. The level where this process is
said to be "free" can be found by finding the intersection of the dry adiabatic lapse rate and the
mixing ratio of an air parcel, then the saturated adiabatic lapse rate until the parser is warmer than
its surroundings. Due to the 660 kilometer discontinuity, there's some dispute as to whether this
process is single- or double-layered in the mantle. The Sun's heating of the Earth's surface causes air
near the surface to be warmed and, as a "thermal", undergo this (*) lifting process, which can results
in the creation of clouds or thunderstorms due to the associated condensation. In the atmospheric sciences,
this term is used primarily with reference to vertical motion of air; in the mantle, it is thought to drive slab
pull and thus plate tectonics. For 10 points, name this type of heat transfer in fluids.
ANSWER: convection [prompt on vertical motion, lifting, rising, or updrafts]
Terms named after this process are traditionally found on the left side of the Navier-Stokes
momentum equations and consist of the partial derivatives of the product of density and one or more
velocity components. The magnitude of the Richardson number determines whether this process is
free or forced. A buoyancy-dependent form of this process causes the formation of hexagonal
prism-shaped cells; that is the Rayleigh-Benard type of it. The Prandtl number, or ratio of kinematic
viscosity to (*) thermal diffusivity, determines whether this process or conduction dominates. This process
creates thermal columns in the atmosphere and causes the upward creeping of the mantle. For 10 points,
name this process in which heat is transferred by the movement of a fluid.
ANSWER: convection [or word forms]
The del dot rho times phi times u term in the generic scalar transport equation represents this
process. This process, when occurring between two plates, creates hexagonal cells named for Benard.
A high Rayleigh number indicates that the free form of this is occurring. This process is responsible
for thermohaline (*) circulation and in the mantle, where it carries heat from the core to the surface. For
10 points, name this form of heat transfer, best exemplified by the rising of hot air.
ANSWER: convection
This phenomenon can be modeled by examining individual parcels which lose their coherence after
travelling the mixing length. This type of instability occurs when the adiabatic gradient is smaller
than the actual gradient according to the Schwarzschild criterion. The nonlinear v dot grad v term in
the Navier-Stokes equations is sometimes called this type of acceleration. One form of this
phenomenon driven by buoyancy causes the formation of namesake (*) hexagonal cells. Whether or not
this phenomenon is caused by an external fluid flow determines whether it is "forced" or "free." This
phenomenon dominates at high values of the Nusselt number. For 10 points, name this mechanism of heat
exchange in which heat transfer is caused by the motion of a fluid, which is contrasted with radiation and
conduction.
ANSWER: convection [accept word forms such as convective, accept both "thermal convection" or "mass convection"]
Tears of wine are caused by a form of this process involving surface tension, the
Marangoni effect. In another form of this phenomenon, polymers move inward
toward a rotating rod; that is the Weissenberg effect. The most common form of
this process, which forms namesake cells, is called the Rayleigh-Benard type. This process can either be
forced or natural, with the latter type being significantly diminished in zero-gravity. Another type of this
process occurs due to buoyancy in the stack effect. This process occurs in the atmosphere to form (*)
thunderstorms and Hadley cells and occurs in the mantle to form hotspots. For ten points, name this type of
heat transfer in which the material itself moves, contrasted with radiation and conduction.
ANSWER: convection
The Boussinesq (BOO-sihn-esk) approximation for this process allows differences in density to be ignored
except when they affect buoyancy (BOY-uhn-see), and the Churchill-Bernstein equation can estimate the
Nusselt numbers that describe this process. This process is associated with high Prandtl (PRAHND-tull)
numbers, and Benard cells model this process in the Earth's mantle. This usually is caused by a combination
of currents and diffusion, and the forced type can be caused by air conditioning and electric fans. Name this
form of heat transfer that does not occur in solids which is often contrasted with radiation and conduction.
ANSWER: convection
This process occurs in cells co-named for Benard that form hexagonal patterns. This process occurs when
the Rayleigh number reaches a high value. Seafloor spreading is caused by its namesake currents in a
portion of the upper mantle known as the asthenosphere. The natural type of this process is caused by
temperature gradients that lead to differences in density. The ratio of this process to conduction is given by
the Nusselt number. For 10 points, name this transfer of heat by the circulation of a fluid that is used in
certain types of ovens.
ANSWER: convection
The dimensionless constant that characterizes the strength of this process can be approximated by
equations named for Ditlus and Boetler. The square of the Brunt-Vaisala frequency being less than
zero is one way to express the Schwarzschild criterion for a stellar object to be stable against this
phenomenon. This mechanism is treated by neglecting density variations (*) except when multiplied by
g; that is the Boussinesq approximation. Its strength is characterized by the Nusselt number, which is the
coefficient of this times a characteristic length divided by the conductivity of the fluid. A well-known type
of this process in which fluid develops Benard cells is named for Rayleigh and Benard. For 10 points, name
this method of heat transfer, which is not conduction or radiation.
ANSWER: convection
This process is either free or forced depending on the Richardson number, which is equal to the Grashof
number over the square of the Reynolds number. When driven from below, this process produces Benard
cells. This process occurs at high values of the Rayleigh and Prandtl numbers. Sunspots occur where the
sun's magnetic field inhibits this process. Seafloor spreading is caused by this process- namesake currents
in the upper mantle. The air around a fire or another heat source is warmed by this process. For 10 points,
name this process of heat transfer occurs in fluids.
ANSWER: convection
One form of this phenomenon involving a spinning rod inducing the inward motion of polymer
solutions is called the Weissenberg effect. In thin layers, this phenomenon results in structures called
Benard cells. If the (*) Grashof number is much greater than the square of the Reynolds number, only the
"forced" type of this process happens to any appreciable extent. It contrasts with processes relying on
photons and on atom-to-atom energy transfers. For 10 points name this process of heat and mass transfer
unique to fluids.
ANSWER: convection
The Boussinesq approximation is used to model the "natural" type of this process, in which fluid motion is
generated by density differences due to temperature gradients. Cells of this process in the atmosphere
include the Hadley cell and the polar vortex. One subtype of this process transports substances using the
fluid's bulk motion in a particular direction - that type is called advection. For 10 points, identify this term
that combines advection and diffusion, the type of energy transfer that occus with the movement of a heated
fluid in its namesake currents.
ANSWER: convection
In the Benard configuration, this process occurs when the Rayleigh number is greater than 1700. This
process is strong when high values for the ratio between viscous diffusion rate and thermal diffusion rate
occur. The ratio of the Grashof number to the square of the Reynolds number determines if this process if
free or forced. Occurring when flows are caused by temperature-driven differences in density, this process
creates namesake currents in fluids. For 10 points, name this form of heat transfer that is not conduction.
ANSWER: convection [or convective flow]
One approximation for this process assumes negligible changes in temperature and only accounts for
density changes in the buoyancy term; that approximation for it was developed by Boussinesq. This process
occurs when a quantity equal to the product of the Grashof number and Prantl number is above 1700.
Another law which assumes this process relates rate of heat transfer to surface area and difference in
temperature, and was developed by Newton. For 10 points, identify this process, the primary mode of heat
transport in fluids, which is different from conduction.
ANSWER: convection [or convective flow]
coefficients of this process and a similar process, which can be estimated with the Churchill-Bernstein
equation. Benard cells are formed during certain types of this process, and quantities named for Grashof and
Prandtl describe the onset of this process. It occurs when the critical value is exceeded by the Rayleigh
number. For 10 points, identify this method of heat transfer commonly observed in fluids.
ANSWER: convection
A device primarily used for this purpose is an array of alternating p- and n-type semiconductors
sandwiched between two conductors, one of which has a current passed through it to use the Peltier
effect. The coefficient of performance for devices that perform this process is the reciprocal of the
Q-sub-h over Q-sub-c minus one. Steven Chu's Nobel-winning research was in the use of lasers and
the Doppler effect to perform this process. This happens to the gas during the isentropic expansion
step of the Carnot cycle. A law named for it states that the time derivative of (*) temperature is equal
to a negative proportionality constant times the difference in temperature between a body and its
surroundings; said law was derived by Isaac Newton. For 10 points, name this process in which heat is
transferred away from a body.
ANSWER: cooling [or refrigeration; or obvious equivalents, such as making things colder by the transfer of heat; prompt on heat transfer]
One method of carrying out this action was developed by London, Clark, and Mendoza and relies on the
fact that a mixture of helium-3 and helium-4 undergoes phase separation. Because the magnetic field times
the differential mangetization contributes a term to the thermodynamic relation, it is possible to carry out
this process by reducing the magnetic field at constant entropy. A non-ideal gas for which the slope of the
inversion curve is negative will undergo this process if constricted at constant enthalpy, a phenomenon
known as the Joule-Thomson effect. On atomic scales, this process can be carried out with laser trapping, as
demonstrated by Steven Chu. For ten points, identify this process which can also be achieved by running a
Carnot heat engine in reverse, the lowering of a substance's temperature.
ANSWER: cooling [accept equivalents like lowering of temperature and refrigeration]
One method of doing this has variations using a Zeeman slower and another which uses a pair of
orthogonally polarized beams. This process can be achieved by successive rounds of adiabatic
magnetization and demagnetization. One method of doing this uses two rounds of Joule-Thompson
expansion and is called the Linde cycle. Claude Cohen-Tannoudji developed a method of doing this
using lasers and the Doppler effect that was used on a sample of rubidium atoms to form the first (*)
Bose-Einstein condensate. This process is necessary to create superfluids and superconductors, and a crude
way of doing it is submersion in liquid nitrogen. For 10 points, name this process in which a system loses
heat energy and decreases in temperature.
ANSWER: cooling [or refrigeration; accept laser cooling, magnetic refrigeration, or similarly more specific answers]
One model partially due to this physicist implements a modification threshold that varies as a
super-linear function of the previous activity of a cell; that threshold is said to be "sliding." That model is of
synaptic plasticity and was developed with Bienenstock and Munro. This physicist theorized that vibrations
in a lattice could interact with electrons to create a positive charge density and create an attractive force. He
developed a theory with two other physicists that describes the electron-phonon interaction; that theory is a
microscopic theory of superconductivity and was developed with Schrieffer and Bardeen. For 10 points,
identify this physicist who names "pairs" of electrons coupled over a range of hundreds of nanometers.
ANSWER: Leon Cooper
The radius of these objects is given by the Pippard coherence length, which is a surprisingly large hundreds
of nanometers. As first theorized by Herbert Frohlich, the bonds that create these objects consist of lattice
vibrations classified as phonons. The formation of these particles in mercury was used to demonstrate the
impact of lattice structure mass known as the isotope effect, and their tunneling is the Josephson effect. This
combination of fermions allows them to behave as bosons. Identify this combination of two electrons used
to explain superconductivity.
ANSWER: Cooper pairs [prompt on electron pair]
A simple qualitative picture of them is that a free electron exerts attractive forces on positive ions,
which in turn exerts an attractive force on another free electron, bounding the two. That aforementioned
description is a simplified model of what interacting groups of two electrons, whose contribution to a
system only becomes sufficiently large when thermal motion is low?
ANSWER: Cooper pairs
This man declined an invitation to advise the Fifth Lateran Council on calendar reform, and his
observation of an eclipse of Aldebaran helped him determine the diameter of the Moon. The seven
assumptions of the model in this man's Little Commentary includes the belief in perfect, circular
orbits, though the evidence gathered in his On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres was used
by Galileo to promote a change in the way people viewed the solar system. Arguing against the
Ptolemaic system of astronomy, name this Polish scientist who developed the heliocentric model of
the universe.
ANSWER: Nicolaus Copernicus [or Mikolaj [MEE-koh-wye] Kopernik]
This man collaborated with his student Rheticus on a trigonometry text. His Frombork Cathedral
gravestone commemorates the central point of his text "On the (+) Revolutions of the Celestial
Spheres." This man's model did away with the complicated epicycles of Ptolemy, and his namesake
"revolution" displaced (*) Earth from the center of the universe. For 10 points, identify this
Polish-German astronomer who is credited with the heliocentric theory.
ANSWER: Nicolaus Copernicus [or Mikolaj Kopernik]
This man received a doctorate from the University of Ferrara despite never having studied there.
One of the only pupils of this scientist, Georg Rheticus (RET-ick-us), published an abstract of this
man's most important theory in the Narratio Prima. The seven basic assumptions of this man's theory
are laid out in his Little Commentary, and his namesake (*) revolution is seen as a model for future
scientific advancement. For 10 points, name this Renaissance Polish astronomer whose work On the
Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres advanced the heliocentric model of the solar system.
ANSWER: Nicolaus Copernicus [or Mikolaj Kopernik; or Nikolaus Kopernikus; or Nicolas Copernico]
This man's most prominent theory was described in his Little Commentary. He appended a disclaimer
that his claims were not literally true, but merely provided a simpler way to perform astronomical
calculations. This scientist wrote On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres. For 10 points, identify this
Polish astronomer best known for his heliocentric theory.
ANSWER: Nicolaus Copernicus
This person is the namesake of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 3 that discovered several long period
pulsars. The ray-crater named after this scientist is in the Oceanus Procellarum on the moon and was
created around the beginning of the time period named for him that began a little over a billion years ago
and is still current. His most important work was On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres, which was
published just before his death and had its impact blunted by a letter by Andreas Osiander. Name this Polish
astronomer who pushed for a heliocentric model of the solar system.
ANSWER: Nicolaus Copernicus
An imbalance between the cause of this phenomenon and pressure gradients causes non-dispersive waves
called Kelvin waves, and it is used to find mass flow rates by comparing the twists in vibrating tubes. With
the conservation of angular momentum, this concept is used to explain the precession of Foucault (fooKOH) pendulums. An apparent acceleration of two times angular velocity cross linear velocity, this concept
shows up as the sum of two terms when one takes the second time-derivative of the position of a person
walking outward on a moving merry-go-round. Name this effect in which objects appear to deflect from
straight lines when viewed from a rotating reference frame.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect/force
This can lead objects to move in an inertial circle, and either inertia or this phenomenon can be used to
explain how a mass flow meter works. The frequency associated with this effect's parameter is twice the
Earth's angular velocity times the sine of the angle of latitude, and this is most noticeable when objects
move long distances along a longitudinal line. It can be explained using inertia and the conservation of
angular momentum, and it has little impact near the equator and causes a rightward curvature in the
Northern Hemisphere. Name this fictitious force caused by a circular reference frame.
ANSWER: Coriolis Effect (accept other second words as long as the first word is Coriolis)
The vertical component of the effect caused by this force is sometimes named for Eotvos. The
ratio of inertial forces to the magnitude of this force is a dimensionless number named for Rossby.
This force causes the apparent (*) deflection of objects moving in rotating reference frames. For 10
points, name this fictitious force that causes winds to deflect to the north and south of the equator, which is
responsible for the formation of cyclones.
ANSWER: Coriolis force [or Coriolis Effect]
When put in the momentum equation, this quantity is represented mathematically as two times
capital omega cross v. When the Rossby number equals one, the net acceleration is due to this
quantity, as gravitational and centripetal accelerations cancel. The Beta Effect describes the
variation in this quantity with (*) latitude, such that it is zero at the equator and a maximum at the poles.
For 10 points, name this weak force caused by the rotation of the Earth, which contrary to myth does not
actually make toilets flush in different directions in different hemispheres.
ANSWER: Coriolis force [or Coriolis effect]
The antennae of moths assist them in flying by accounting for this effect, which is also used in mass flow
meters. The Rossby number can describe whether this effect is prominent in a system by relating it to
inertial forces. When considered on the Earth, the Beta effect leads to its variation with latitude. This effect
is caused by a pseudoforce and it was studied by a French scientist interested in water wheels. Leading to
deflection of moving objects in rotating reference frames, it drives oceanic and atmospheric currents. For 10
points, name this effect which causes cyclones on Earth to rotate counter-clockwise in the Northern
Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect
The ratio of the inertial force to this phenomenon is known as the Rossby number. The magnitude of
this force is proportional to twice a constant times the sine of the latitude because it is proportional to
the cross product of the angular velocity of a (*) frame and the velocity of a particle. This phenomenon
is responsible for a flow of water perpendicular to prevailing winds known as Ekman transport. It is not
present on the equator, explaining why hurricanes do not form there. For 10 points, name this force that
deflects moving objects to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere, a
fictitious deflective force observed in a rotating reference frame.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect [accept Coriolis force]
Buys-Ballot's law is a consequence of this phenomenon. The beta plane approximation is used to
estimate this phenomenon's associated parameter, which is proportional to the sine of latitude. When
the pressure gradient force is balanced by this phenomenon for a flow, it is termed geostrophic.
When the Rossby number is one, gravitational and centrifugal accelerations cancel and this phenomenon
can be observed with Foucault's pendulum. In the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, this phenomenon
deflects moving objects to the left, and right, respectively, creating clockwise and counterclockwise
rotation. For 10 points, identify this fictitious force that results from the Earth's rotation.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect [or Coriolis force]
The Rossby numbers found in tornados are negligible when discussing this force. This force can only exist
when there is a rotating reference frame in use. The scientist known for studying this force referred to it as a
"compound centrifugal force." A consequence of inertia, it is responsible for Kelvin waves in the ocean. For
10 points, name this scientific phenomena that causes clockwise spin of weather formations and does not in
fact affect the direction of water swirling in toilet bowls.
ANSWER: Coriolis Effect [or Coriolis Force]
This phenomenon's namesake frequency is proportional to the sine of latitude. This phenomenon
creates westerlies at the boundary of the Hadley and Ferrel cells. The Ekman spiral is created by
drag and this phenomenon. This phenomenon causes a (*) clockwise motion in the Northern
Hemisphere. Like the centrifugal force, this force is fictitious. For 10 points, name this force that deflects
objects moving in a rotating reference frame, but does not actually cause the rotation of water in your toilet.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect [or Coriolis force]
This effect's analog in electrodynamics is called the Christoffel voltage, and the normal component of this
force is found by the Eotvos effect. The ratio of inertial forces to this force is called the Rossby number, and
this effect is responsible for movements in the ocean's Ekman layer. This effect concerns moving objects in
a rotating reference frame, and it is one of the fictitious forces. The effect responsible for the rotation of
cyclones, for 10 points, identify this effect in which a moving object will drift to the right in the Northern
Hemisphere
ANSWER: Coriolis force
This force is calculated in a ratio with the inertial force to give a dimensionless number representing fluid
flow, known as the Rossby number. Though it is responsible for the nature of the rotation of large scale
objects such as tropical cyclones, it does not play a significant role in the rotation of toilet bowl and bathtub
vortexes, as described in the common myth. FTP, name this phenomenon which causes moving objects on
the surface of the earth to appear to veer to the left in the southern hemisphere, and to the right on the
northern hemisphere.
ANSWER: Coriolis Effect
One type of object that experiences this effect follows the Taylor-Proudman theorem, which defines
lines parallel to a certain axis of constant velocity, which are called Taylor columns. Rossby waves have a
frequency named for and due to this effect, which emerges because of a rotating reference frame.
Ekman transport and Hadley cells are influenced by, for 10 points, this phenomenon in which an object
traveling a straight line in a rotating reference frame appears to follow a curved path.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect [or Coriolis force]
This inertial force, described by a 19th-century French engineer and mathematician in 1835, often aids the
formation of jet streams and western boundary currents. It is also responsible for Rossby and Kelvin waves
as well as other types of waves found in the ocean and atmosphere. This effect is often naively used to
suggest that toilets flush in different directions, depending on whether they are in the northern or southern
hemisphere. FTP, name the effect responsible for counterclockwise movement of cyclones in the northern
hemisphere and clockwise movement in the southern hemisphere.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect
A small value for the Rossby number indicates a significant effect caused by this force. Its root cause is
the unequal rates of rotation for the Earth; the fastest rate is at the equator thus causing an object traveling
south from the equator to deviate westward. The effect of this force is proportional to two times the rotation
rate of the Earth times the sine of the angle of the latitude, thus this force causes no effect at the equator.
For 10 points, name this apparent deflection of an object by inertial forces in a rotating frame of reference
which is partially responsible for the rotation of hurricanes but not the flow of water in a toilet.
ANSWER: Coriolis force [or equivalents for force like "effect"]
Its namesake parameter is multiplied by meridional distance in the Sverdrup balance, and it is a
dominating force in the Ekman layer. It is an alternate name of the mass flow meter and causes the
barotropic and baroclinic differentiation of the Rossby waves. The misconception that a bathtub drains
different ways in different hemispheres is often attributed to it, and this effect can be observed
indirectly through Foucault's pendulum. Introduced along with the centrifugal force in rotating frames
of reference, for 10 points, name this fictitious deflection of moving entities.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect
The Eotvos effect is the vertical component of this phenomenon. It becomes negligible when the
dimenstionless quantity also known as the Kibel number, the Rossby number, is large. Its strength is
proportional to the velocity of an objects and the angular velocity of the frame. For 10 points, what effect,
which accounts for atmospheric and oceanic current, occurs when a rotating frame of reference creates a
fictitious force that causes projectiles to appear deflected?
ANSWER: Coriolis effect
The ratio of the inertial force to this force is known as the Rossby number. The interaction of pressure
gradients with this force causes geostrophic motion. It can be seen in the deflection of an object due to the
Earth's rotation, and causes the rotation of hurricanes. It is especially prevalent in low-pressure systems, in
which the centrifugal force has little effect. For 10 points, name this force which is commonly supposed to
affect the direction of rotation of water in a toilet.
ANSWER: Coriolis force
One result of this is that objects feel heavier or lighter depending on direction of motion, which is known as
the Eotvos effect. The Ekman spiral is caused by this, and the ratio of inertial forces to forces caused by it is
known as the Rossby number. Acceleration due to this effect is equal to negative two times the cross
product of the system's angular velocity and the particle's velocity. It is directed radially inward for high
pressure systems, and cyclones rarely form at the equator due to the absence of this effect. For 10 points,
name this effect in which objects appear to deflect from a straight line when viewed from a rotating
reference frame.
ANSWER: Coriolis Effect [accept Coriolis Force]
In electrodynamics, this effect leads to the formation of an instantaneous voltage called the Christoffel
voltage, and cyclostrophic flow sees zero contributions from friction and this effect. The ratio of net
acceleration of a fluid to acceleration due to this effect is the Rossby number. Its acceleration is given by
negative two times the cross product between the angular velocity of the system and the velocity of the
particle. It is the cause of the rotation of sunspots and creates geostrophic winds. This effect generally
manifests in the deflection of an object because of the Earth's rotation. For 10 points, name this effect that
does not actually change the direction of water swirling in toilet bowls.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect
It plays a major role in the El Nino-Southern Oscillation because its action near the Equator creates
atmospheric and oceanic Kelvin waves which only form for eastward motion. In the atmosphere in the
absence of friction, a balance between the "force" resulting from it and the pressure gradient force results in
geostrophic winds that blow parallel to isobars. Rossby waves in the jet stream form due to shear caused by
variations in it with latitude. More visibly, it explains why cyclones rotate counter-clockwise in the
Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere. FTP, name this deflection of objects in
motion in rotating frames of reference that doesn't actually make toilets flush in different directions.
ANSWER: Coriolis effect (accept Coriolis force)
Forbush decrease refers to loss of cosmic ray intensity due to matter originating from this entity. The
TRACE mission has utilized 171-angstrom radiation filters to study namesake loops extending into this
region arising from fixed points of magnetic flux below it. Those loops, which reach megaKelvin
temperatures, act as precursors to events originating here involving the violent expulsion of matter, this
region's namesake mass ejections. The source of solar wind, this region surrounds the chromosphere. For
10 points, name this plasma region forming the outermost portion of the Sun's atmosphere, whose name
comes from the Latin for "crown".
ANSWER: corona [accept coronal mass ejections or CMEs until "entity" in first sentence; prompt on "Sun" until "region" in second sentence]
In 1993, the Yohkoh Observatory was launched to study how emissions from this interfered with helmet
streamers, but a certain phenomenon caused a power shutdown in 2001. Bengt Edlen disproved the theory
of a new element constituting this region, instead showing that this it is composed of highly ionized iron,
nickel, and calcium, which are buffered by a one million Kelvin temperature. For 10 points, name this
plasma region only visible during solar eclipses, which surrounds the Sun and comes from the Latin for
"crown".
ANSWER: corona [prompt on "Sun" before "region"]
EIT and Moreton waves have been observed to originate in this area which contains an F layer who
emissions merge with the zodiacal light. Filament Cavities in this region appear above H-alpha
filaments and are X-ray quiet. Alfven waves and magnetic reconnection have been proposed to solve
a problem relating to this area which features helmet streamers above active regions of its star's body.
Skylab confirmed the existence of holes in this region whose excessive heat problem was once explained by
spicules. Transients, also known as this region's namesake Mass ejections often accompany flares and
prominences on the sun. FTP, name this incredibly hot, outer region of the sun's atmosphere which is the
only region visible during an eclipse.
ANSWER: Corona
The imaging and understanding of certain events in this region is the goal of NASA's STEREO mission,
whose rotation was measured by the LASCO instrument and by Waldmeier using its namesake green line
which arises from a transition in iron. Divided into the K, F, and E components, this region manifests areas
of low x-ray emission known as its namesake "holes," which were discovered by SkyLab. The OSO-7
instrument first detected the namesake mass ejections emanating from this region, which extends about 13
million kilometers from the photosphere. Consisting of a plasma that is the last stage of acceleration for
outgoing solar wind, for ten points, identify this outer layer of the solar atmposhere.
ANSWER: corona
Looping magnetic fields in this region form areas with long, pointed peaks known as helmet
streamers. Bernard Lyot invented the first method for continuous imaging of this region. Spectral
lines produced in this region were initially attributed to an unknown gas named after it, but were
later determined to come from ionized iron. Lockyer and Frankland's studies of this region led to
their coining the term (*) "helium" for a gas first observed here. "Holes" in this region are the origin of
the solar wind, bursts of which include this region's namesake "mass ejections." This region is seen when
the moon blocks out the photosphere during a solar eclipse. For 10 points, name this outermost layer of the
Sun.
ANSWER: corona [prompt on "Sun"]
The SOHO and TRACE projects have observed a series of loops in this region which form a
"magnetic carpet." Structures found in this region include polar plumes and helmet streamers.
Alfven waves and magnetic reconnection are two explanations for this region's namesake heating
problem. Open magnetic field lines in this region's namesake (*) holes allow gas to escape, producing
the fast solar wind. Billions of kilograms of plasma fly out into space during one of this region's namesake
mass ejections. A temperature of over 1 million Kelvin characterizes, for 10 points, what outermost region
of the Sun's atmosphere, which lies above the photosphere and chromosphere?
ANSWER: corona [prompt on the "atmosphere of the Sun"]
The temperatures of certain loops in these regions are given by an empirically-fit power law in the
product of base pressure and length. The magnetic carpet may be one contributor to its temperature.
It is distinguished by the presence of forbidden lines such as the 6374-angstrom iron-10 line. This
region lies above the transition region, which generates the Lyman continuum that populates the "K"
part of this region. Holes in this layer contain outwards-pointing open (*) magnetic field lines; the
reconnection of those lines may be responsible for the otherwise-inexplicable heat of this region. Masses of
ionized particles ejected from this region are responsible for strong geomagnetic storms. For 10 points,
name this thin outermost layer of the sun.
ANSWER: corona
The intensity of light passing through a polarizer equals its intensity times the square of this function with
respect to the direction of polarization, according to Malus- Law. This function has a phase constant of zero
for the position function of a mass-on-a-spring released from its maximum displacement. For a mass sitting
on an inclined plane, the normal force is proportional to this function of the angle of the ramp. Dot products
depend on this function of the angle between two vectors. The horizontal component of a projectile's
velocity includes this function of the angle. For 10 points, name this function equal to sine divided by
tangent or adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine
A spherical harmonic can be decomposed into N times an exponential times the associated Legendre
polynomial of THIS function. The wavelength shift in Compton scattering is equal to the Compton
wavelength times one minus this function. The square of this function appears multiplied by the
incident intensity to give the emitted intensity of a polarizer in (*) Malus- Law. This function appears
on the top left and the bottom right entry on the standard 2 by 2 rotation matrix. For a block on an incline,
this function multiplied by the force of gravity gives the magnitude of the normal force. For two vectors, the
dot product is equal to their magnitude multiplied by this function of the angle between them. For 10 points,
name this function which is also used to find the x-component of a given vector.
ANSWER: cosine
Wenzel's law states that the absolute value of this function for a contact angle with a rough surface
is always greater than that for a contact angle with a smooth surface. The weight is multiplied by this
function of the contact angle to yield the normal force exerted by an inclined surface, and the
magnitude of work is found by multiplying force, distance, and this function of the angle between
exerted force and direction of movement. For 10 points, name this function that appears in the dot
product and is represented as adjacent leg over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine
Svensmark and Friis-Christensen showed the correlation between these object and Earth's cloud cover. A
high-energy variety violates the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin limit on their energies a Forbush decrease occurs
in one type after a coronal mass ejection. A bi-static radar using VHF transmitters is used in the
MARIACHI apparatus to detect them, and Shmoos are used in the CHICOS project. Detected by charge
coupled devices or the particle track-etch technique, they help form the Van Allen belts. Victor Hess used
Wulf electrometers to discover the extraterrestrial origin of, for 10 points, what charged particles composed
mostly of protons.
ANSWER: cosmic rays
One type of these entities are believed to be emitted by Zevatrons; one example of that subtype was
detected at the Dugway Proving Ground and was called the "Oh-My-God" particle. The AMS
instrument showed that these entities do not contain anti-helium atoms. The Auger Observatory was
built to detect these entities. One method of detecting these entities relies on them striking stacks of
polycarbonate, which are then dissolved in sodium hydroxide to reveal tracks. Their resonant
interaction with the cosmic microwave background cuts (*) off their energies at the GZK limit. They
were originally detected using a set of three Wulf electrometers by Victor Hess in a balloon, and they
mostly consist of protons. For 10 points, name these showers of particles that originate from space.
ANSWER: cosmic rays
Carl Stoermer pioneered the use of rigidity cutoffs in determining what amount of these particles
penetrate the Earth's atmosphere. Above a certain energy, these particles cannot travel further than 50
megaparsecs without interacting with the CMB to produce delta baryons that decay into pions. An
observatory in Argentina uses four fluorescence detectors and over a thousand water-based Cherenkov
detectors to register these particles; data from that observatory was used to reject the theory of the isotropic
distribution for certain types of them. That is the Pierre Auger observatory. That aforementioned energy is
the GZK limit. The most energetic particle of this type to be detected was the Oh-My-God particle. For 10
points, name these highly energetic particles from outer space.
ANSWER: cosmic rays [or any type of energy cosmic ray, such as ultra high energy, etc.; prompt on protons; prompt on neutrinos; do not accept galactic or extragalactic cosmic rays]
The exposure of CCDs on the ground is limited by these particles, which creates a namesake background
that can lead to the detection of false stars. The Haverah Project is an ongoing project that detects them.
Atmospheric fluorescence is the basis for the Pierre Auger Observatory's method of finding them.
PAMELA, CHICOS, and CASA are projects researching the effects of these particles, which interact with
other nucleons during a namesake spallation process that is one source of baryonic matter. They produce
pions and kaons when they collide with particles in Earth's atmosphere and are composed of 90% hydrogen
nuclei and 9% alpha particles. For 10 points, what are these high energy particles that bombard Earth's
surface?
ANSWER: cosmic rays
The Compton-Getting effect predicts an anisotropy in these phenomena, and Price discovered that
these phenomena create instabilities in layered sheets of plastic, which then show up during an
etching process. A Coronal Mass Ejection is preceded by a suppression of these objects called the
Forbush decrease, and the Oh-My-God particle was discovered in one of these entities. An interaction
between the CMB and these phenomenon is responsible for the GZK cutoff of their energies. They can
create tritium via spallation and are detected by their showers of pions and kaons that decay into muons,
which can then be picked up by bubble chambers. For 10 points, name these high energy particles from
outer space.
ANSWER: Cosmic rays
The Gaisser-Hillas function can be used to model these objects, while one recently built facility employs a
combination of PMT's and flourescence detectors to observe these. They have been studied by the AGASA
experiment as well as the aforementioned Pierre Auger experiment, and their spectrum is modeled with a
differential spectral index equal to approximately 2.7. The theoretical maximum energy of these objects is
called the GZK limit, and is about 10 to the 19th electron volts. They were discovered by Victor Hess, and
they are the main source of the muons that reach earth. FTP, identify these particles from outer space that
interact with the atmosphere, and that consist mainly of energetic protons.
ANSWER: cosmic rays
An anomalous type of these entities is produced by ionization via charge exchange followed by acceleration
by the termination shock. High energy examples of these entities will interact with CMB photons to produce
pions, lowering their energy to below the GZK cutoff. The flux of these entities is much smaller at lower
energies than higher ones due to deflection by the solar wind. Carl Anderson conducted a 1932 study of
these entities using a cloud chamber in which he discovered the positron. Around nine percent of these
entities are alpha particles, while nearly ninety percent of them are protons. For 10 points, name these
particles which constantly bombard the Earth from outer space.
ANSWER: cosmic rays
The sign of this parameter differentiates between de Sitter and anti de Sitter space. It is multiplied by
c squared and divided by 3 in one term of the Friedmann equation. Quantum field theory predicts it
to be on the order of the Planck mass to the fourth and it is measured to be drastically smaller. This
quantity minus half the scalar curvature multiplied by the metric tensor is proportional to the stressenergy tensor in the (*) Einstein field equations. This quantity found renewed relevance when
observations of type Ia ("one A") supernovae revealed that the universe's expansion was accelerating. For
10 points, name this parameter introduced by Albert Einstein to ensure that general relativity would still
predict a static universe, often symbolized lambda.
ANSWER: cosmological constant [accept lambda before mention]
Like the scalar curvature, this quantity is multiplied by the metric tensor in Einstein's field
equations. Although quantum field theory predicts a property that could be represented by this, QFT
predictions for its value do not match cosmological ones, causing this property's namesake problem.
Introducing this parameter into the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker metric gives the standard
Lambda-CDM model. This entity contrasts with quintessence and other forms of dark energy because it is
constant and equal at all points in the universe. This quantity, equivalent to the energy density of empty
space, was first proposed by Einstein to allow for a static universe in general relativity. For 10 points, name
this quantity, which Einstein called his "biggest blunder."
ANSWER: cosmological constant [prompt on lambda]
The ratio between this value and the critical density of the universe is approximately 0.7, and that
value corresponds to the dark energy density. It is multiplied by one third of the square of the speed
of light in the Friedmann equation. Taking this quantity divided by 8 pi gives the vacuum energy
density. Quantum field theories unusually predict its value to be 120 orders of magnitude greater
than its real value. This value originally appeared multiplying the metric tensor in the (*) Einstein
Field Equations in order to maintain a stationary universe. Einstein referred to its conception as the "biggest
blunder" of his life since the universe is expanding. For 10 points, identify this mysterious value in general
relativity symbolized lambda.
ANSWER: cosmological constant [or lambda till mention]
Studies of type IA supernovas may be able to put constraints on this quantity, and data from the Hipparcos
satellite may provide a solution to one of the problems it is meant to solve, a discrepancy in the age of the
universe and in the age of the stars. It can be added to Friedmann's Equation to predict the size and general
curvature of the universe. Proposed physical explanations for it include quintessence as a fifth force, and
vacuum energy. It was originally added to the left the field equation, showing it is a property of space. For
10 points, name this quantity, denoted lambda, which Einstein called his "biggest mistake," that now is
known to predict an accelerating universe.
ANSWER: cosmological constant [accept cosmological term]
A stepwise change in current potential curves of nanometer size objects is named for this man,
while crystals with particles of same charge occurring in plasmas are also named for him. The type of
friction associated with the contact of two surfaces was first developed by him, and he also names the
repulsion associated with two objects of like charges. For 10 points, name this Frenchman whose namesake
law states that the force between two charges is proportional to the product of their charges and the inverse
square of the distance between them.
ANSWER: Charles Augustin de Coulomb
The amount of energy necessary for nuclear fusion is known as this person's namesake barrier. One law
named after this person allows the use of the coefficient of kinetic friction by stating that frictional force is
independent of speed, and another law named after him uses a value equal to the reciprocal of four pi times
the permittivity constant, which works out to about nine times ten to the ninth in SI units. That law states
that there is an electric force and charge follow an inverse-square relationship with distance. Name this
scientist whose eponymous unit is equivalent to about six quintillion protons and measures charge.
ANSWER: Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Quantum tunneling enables a lower temperature to overcome his namesake barrier that is associated with
obtaining fusion, and Yukawa is the namesake of his screened potential. Setting the divergence of the vector
potential to zero gives this man's namesake gauge. His namesake constant is one over four pi times the
permittivity of free space, and appears in an equation that is the magnetic equivalent of the Biot-Savart law,
and is analogous in form to Newton's law of universal gravitation. His namesake law states the force exerted
by one point charge on another varies inversely as the square of the distance. FTP name this French
physicist, the namesake of the unit of electric charge.
ANSWER: Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
In materials science, this man and Mohr name a failure criterion equation. A blockade named for this
scientist can be observed in single electron transistors, and he is the namesake of a barrier that makes
achieving nuclear fusion reactions difficult. Kinetic friction is independent of velocity according to a law
named for this scientist, who invented the torsion balance. An inverse-square law named for this man gives
the electrostatic force between two separated charges. For 10 points, name this French physicist who is also
the namesake of the SI unit of charge.
ANSWER: Charles Augustin de Coulomb
A type of explosion named for this man occurs in non-metals when a multiply charged ion causes surface
damage to non-metals. In another phenomenon named for him, an electron from a contact cannot tunnel into
an island unless its energy overcomes the fermi level and confinement energies. An operator named for him
is the potential of an arbitrary orbital felt by an electron in a given orbital. For a nuclear reaction to occur,
the thermal energy is set equal to a barrier named for this man who also discovered a fundamental law of
electrostatics. For 10 points, identify this scientist who lends his name to the SI unit of electric charge and
an inverse-square law regarding the force between point charges.
ANSWER: Charles Augustin de Coulomb
Single electron transistors display his namesake "blockade," while the Yukawa potential has the same form
as a "screened" potential named for this man, and his namesake gauge sets the divergence of the vector
potential equal to zero. His namesake unit is alternately equal to a farad times a volt, or an ampere times a
second, and his namesake force law describes the one over r squared interaction between electrostatic
charges. FTP, identify this French namesake of the SI unit of charge.
ANSWER: Charles Augustin de Coulomb
With Christian Otto Mohr, this scientist names a model that measures the effect of stress on brittle
materials. This man invented the torsion balance and names a law of friction that states that an
object's sliding velocity does not affect its kinetic friction. This scientist used the torsion balance to
measure the electrostatic force between charges, and he names an inverse-square law which can be used
to determine the force between two charged particles. For 10 points, name this French namesake of the SI
unit of charge.
ANSWER: Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
A simplification of this law for an ion that is brought from infinity and placed within a crystal lattice
is seen in the portion of the Born-Lande equation that incorporates Madelung constants. Electron
pairing energy is given by the exchange energy and the repulsion between spin-paired (*) electrons
that this law predicts. It contains a namesake constant that incorporates the permittivity of space, and it
can be used to explain why like charges repel. For 10 points, name this law in which the force and
distance between two point charges share an inverse square relationship.
ANSWER: Coulomb's law
One derivation of this law uses the Lorentz Force Law without the magnetic field's presence, and one of
Gauss's laws. Its namesake constant is the inverse of the product of 4 pi and the permittivity of free space,
or approximately the product of 9 billion, the square of a Newton, and the inverse of its namesake unit. It is
the electrical analog of Newton's Law of Gravitation. For 10 points, name this inverse-square law that
relates an electric force to point charges, which is named after a French scientist.
ANSWER: Coulomb's Law
This statement can be derived by applying Gauss's law to a spherical surface. One constant in this
law is often rewritten as one over four pi times the permittivity of free space, and dividing it by
charge gives the electric field of a point charge. The constant of proportionality for this statement is
symbolized (*) k, and its value is equal to nine times ten to the nine. It states that force is proportional to
the inverse-square of distance. For 10 points, name this statement that gives the electrostatic force between
two charges.
ANSWER: Coulomb's law
The phenomenon modeled by this law cannot maintain a stable equilibrium according to Earnshaw's
theorem, and a screened version of its potential was developed by Yukawa. Integrating this law generates
spherical equipotential surfaces. The constant in it is equal to one over four pi times the permittivity of free
space. This law is an electric analogue of Newton's law of universal gravitation. For 10 points, identify this
law that gives the force between two point charges as the product of the charges times a constant, k, over
the square of the distance.
ANSWER: Coulomb's (COO-lawm's) law
The Uehling potential is a first-order quantum correction to this law that accounts for vacuum
polarization. A variant of this law that predicts an exponentially damped force that is always
attractive is said to be a "screened" form of it and is generated by the Yukawa potential. A direct
analogue of this result for the case of steady-state currents is the Biot-Savart law. John Robison's
discovery of the (*) inverse-square nature of this law was replicated by its namesake using a torsion
balance
with a metal ball on a silk thread. A constant in it is equal to one over four pi times the permittivity of free
space, and the principle of superposition for it equates the net force to the charge times the vector sum of
the
electric fields. For 10 points, name this law describing the electrostatic interaction of two point charges.
ANSWER: Coulomb's law
This law contributes the first term of the Lorentz force. The constant in this law equals one over four pi
times the permittivity of free space. An expression for electric field can be calculated by dividing both sides
of this equation by a test charge. Like Newton's Law of Gravitation, this law gives an inverse-square
dependence on distance. For 10 points, name this law which gives the force between two stationary
charges, named for a Frenchman who also names the SI unit of charge.
ANSWER: Coulomb's Law
The constant used in this equation is equal to the inverse value of four pi times the permittivity of space.
A negative value for this inverse square law shows that there is an attraction between the points being
considered because of the unlike values of those points. This law is used to find the amount of electric
interaction between two particles based on their distance. For 10 points, identify this law named for the
man who also gives his name to the SI unit of electric charge.
ANSWER: Coulomb's Law
Gronau and London have developed a way of using isospin triangle relations to remove theoretical
uncertainties in the value of this phenomenon caused due to so-called "penguin pollution." This
phenomenon is non-zero if and only if the Jarlskog invariant is non-zero. In one context, the value for this
phenomenon is called sin(2b) ("sine of two beta"), and the existence of this is one of the Sakharov
conditions. In the Standard Model, this phenomenon arises due to an imaginary component in the CKM
matrix, and this phenomenon was first observed in 1964 in kaon decays by Cronin and Fitch. FTP, what is
this breaking of a combination of two symmetries of nature?
ANSWER: CP violation (accept things like CP asymmetry)
A constellation named for one of these entities has as its brightest star Al Tarf,
and its 55 star has five planets. Another object named for these entities has a
blue region that Shklovsky discovered to be produced by synchrotron radiation,
and it was named after a sketch by Lord Rosse. The pulsar with this name was
first recorded by Jon Bevis, and its origin was observed by(*) Chinese astronomers
in 1054. That constellation, which contains the Beehive Cluster, is the namesake for the
northern limit of the tropics. For ten points, identify this animal that names the first of
the Messier objects, in Taurus, and the constellation Cancer.
ANSWER: crab (accept Crab Nebula or Cancer before mentioned)
The acceleration of a heavy fluid by a light fluid affects cloud-shock interactions which results in the
characteristic Rayleigh-Taylor fingers of this object. It contains a pulsar rotating so quickly as to give the
appearance of superluminal motion. Its apparent magnitude is negative three point two, and it notably emits
a wide spectrum of synchrotron radiation. In the 18th century, Charles Messier rediscovered this object in
the constellation Taurus, giving it one of its appelations, M1. In 1054, Chinese astronomers observed the
supernova that formed, for 10 points, what celestial object?
ANSWER: Crab Nebula [or Messier 1 before it is mentioned]
Before the discovery of pulsars, Iosif Schlovskii determined that the whitish glow around this entity is
composed of synchrotron radiation produced by an accreting neutron star. The observation of
knotty filaments within it indicates that it has been rapidly expanding over the last nine centuries,
since it was first observed by the (*) Chinese in the same year as the Battle of Hastings. A 1066 AD
supernova produced this object, placed first in Charles Messier's namesake catalogue. For 10 points,
identify this astronomical object, named after a certain arthropod.
ANSWER: Crab Nebula (accept M1 before Messier; accept NGC 1952 or Taurus A)
The predominant theory to explain the surprisingly low mass of this object is that some mass was
carried away by stellar wind; however, that would have resulted in a shell around the object, and no
such shell has been found. This object has high concentrations of helium in a large band crossing its
central region. The thickness of the atmosphere of Saturn's moon, Titan, was measured as it passed
by the (*) synchrotron radiation emitted by an object that spins 30 cycles per second in the center of this
nebula. This nebula with a pulsar at its center was first observed in 1731 by John Bevis. For 10 points,
name this remnant of a supernova witnessed by astronomers in 1054, a nebula in the constellation Taurus
which is designated M1.
ANSWER: Crab Nebula [accept M1 early]
Aharonian, Bogovalov, and Khangulyan have recently proposed a model based on cold unrelativistic wind
to explain observations of this location. Kennel and Coroniti developed a magnetohydrodynamic model to
explain the boundaries of this place. Its internal structure includes a torus at a right angle to its internal axis
and the "inner ring." Discovered by John Bevis, this is the brightest gamma ray source in the heavens. This
location is emitting synchrotron radiation and it is home to a slowing down pulsar. This object is believed to
be the remnants of a supernova in 1054. For 10 points, name this nebula that is M1 in the Messier Catalog.
ANSWER: Crab Nebula [or M1 before mentioned; or Crab Pulsar]
Images observed in 1996 found that this object emits two streams of polar winds which initiate a shock
front dubbed a "dancing sprite" by scientists. In January 2003, Titan's transit of it allowed astronomers to
use this object's x-rays to measure that moon's atmospheric thickness. Iosif Shkolvsky suggested that
synchrotron radiation could be emerging from this remnant of SN 1054, a supernova discovered by Chinese
astronomers. For 10 points, name this first member of the Messier catalog, a pulsar wind nebula found in
Taurus and named for a crustacean.
ANSWER: Crab Nebula [accept Crab after "nebula"]
A recent study has suggested that this object contains four magnetic poles, and much earlier, Iosif
Shklovsky proposed that a colorful region of this object was attributable to synchrotron radiation. It
contains knotty filaments, an indicator of its accelerated expansion from the time of its creation, which was
observed by the Chinese in 1054. It contains an object first confirmed in 1968, a namesake pulsar spinning
at 30 cycles per second. Located in Taurus, for 10 points, name this cloudy entity which resembles a certain
animal, the first of the Messier objects.
ANSWER: Crab Nebula [or NGC 1952; accept M1 before "Messier" is read; prompt on Taurus A; prompt on Taurus X-1]
A superflare from this object was detected in April 2011, and it is located in the visible night sky near Zeta
Tauri. In 2003, Saturn passed between the Earth and this object, allowing for the study of the moon Titan,
and each June its position creates good images of the Sun's corona. The name of this object came about
because of a drawing by the Earl of Rosse, and it is the first object in the Messier
Catalogue. A pulsar located near its center emits an enormous amount of radiation, including X-rays. Name
this remnant of a supernova that was observed on Earth during the 11th century.
ANSWER: Crab Nebula
Iosif Shklovsky proposed that the amorphous mass in the center of this object, delineated by Baade and
Minkowski, emits polarized light from high-energy electrons spiraling in a magnetic field, which Oort and
Walraven called synchrotron radiation. It shows Rayleigh-Taylor Instability in its characteristic fingers.
First observed by John Bevis, it is located in the constellation Taurus, and was originally mistaken for a
comet by Charles Messier, who made it the first object in his knew catalog. This object's namesake pulsar
lies at its center, the collapsed core of a star that collapsed in 1054, producing the supernova which created
this object. For 10 points, name this pulsar wind nebula which, with its cloudy center encapsulated by
tendrils, kind of looks like a crustacean.
ANSWER: the Crab Nebula (prompt on M1 before "Messier")
It's not the Sun, but rapid changes in the magnetic field surrounding its central object are a very probable
cause for its recent flares. Radiation from this object was used to map the Sun's corona and measure the
thickness of Titan. Jan Oort was able to determine that the polarized light from this object was a product of
synchrotron radiation. At its center, this object contains a pulsar with a period of 33 milliseconds which is
one of the brightest gamma ray sources in the sky. SN 1054, the supernova responsible for what the Chinese
called a "guest star", produced this object. Identify this supernova remnant, the first entry in the Messier
catalogue.
ANSWER: Crab Nebula
Radiation from this object has recently been used to study the sun's corona and the atmosphere of
Saturn's moon Titan as each transited it. It is surrounded by a helium-rich torus, and near its center,
a shock front is formed by its interaction with the equatorial wind produced by its identically named
pulsar. First recorded by Jon Bevis, this object in the constellation Taurus was named from the shape of
a drawing of it by the Earl of Rosse. For 10 points, name this object produced by a supernova seen in the
year 1054, a nebula that is the first entry in Messier's catalogue.
ANSWER: crab nebula [accept just crab after "nebula" is read]
The calculation of this quantity for various substances was the original driving force for Nicholas
Metropolis and Stanislaw Ulam to develop Monte Carlo models, as the relevant dimensions encountered
limit the usefulness of a continuum approach. It can be reduced with the use of a beryllium reflector, while
mean free path and radiative capture effects make it inversely proportional to density. Although some
applications require the "prompt" version of this quantity, others use moderation to ensure that delayed
neutrons are also needed to reach it. For 10 points, name this smallest amount of material needed to sustain
a fissile nuclear reaction.
ANSWER: critical mass
One method of calculating this quantity is called OB-1. At this quantity in an infinite medium, the
product of the reproduction factor, utilization factor, resonance escape probability, and epsilon is equal to
one. Calculations of this quantity often ignore delayed incident particles and only consider prompt ones,
and the calculation of this quantity relies on a fudge factor that considers deviations from spherical
geometry. This quantity corresponds to a multiplication factor of one, and the original method of
calculating it was developed by Peierls. This quantity is calculated by imagining a neutron taking a random
walk through a bunch of nuclei. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of fissile material needed to
sustain a nuclear reaction.
ANSWER: critical mass
This experiment was used to derive a value of the parameter epsilon equal to approximately .0023, which
was later more accurately measured by the Fermilab KTeV and CERN NA48 experiments. The detectors in
this experiment were a set of spark chambers with magnets angled at 22 degrees, while the apparatus itself
consisted of a 57-foot tube with a particle beam pointed at one side. The experiment made use of the
Brookhaven Alternating Gradient synchrotron, and about one in five hundred of the detected particles were
the product of the faster decay process, many more than expected. Winning its namesakes the 1980 Nobel,
for 10 points, name this experiment, which used the decay of kaons into pions to show direct CP violation.
ANSWER: Cronin-Fitch experiment [accept anything with Cronin and Fitch in it, also accept things like "The experiment that showed direct CP violation" before mention]
For a given interaction, this value can be obtained up to normalization by integrating the square modulus of
an element of the transfer matrix over all orientations. That's the case because this quantity is in general the
all-solid-angle integral of a related quantity having the name of this quantity prefixed with differential. One
compelling argument for the necessity of quantum theory is the fact that this quantity diverges for
Rutherford scattering. This quantity is formally the constant of proportionality between flux and reaction
rate density per target density, so this quantity times the target density is the probability of reaction. This
variable is usually symbolized lower-case sigma and is often given in the unit barn, equal to ten to the minus
twenty-fourth centimeters squared. For 10 points, name this quantity that can be thought of as the
probability that one particle will hit another.
ANSWER: microscopic total cross-section [prompt on sigma]
One explanation for this process is methane outgassing, which relies on dissociation of clathrates. The
Ganesa Macula dome may have been created by this process, and in another location this process is
responsible for creating the E ring and occurs in the "tiger stripes." Hili and Mahilani are two structures
responsible for it, and the radioactive decay on may drive it on Quaoar. It is usually caused by tidal friction
or a sub-surface greenhouse effect. The first known instance of this phenomenon was discovered by
Voyager 2 on Triton, while Cassini discovered this phenomenon on Enceladus. FTP, name this
astrogeological phenomenon in which geysers spew cold water, ammonia, or methane, seen on several outer
planet moons.
ANSWER: Cryovolcanism
One man with this surname developed a namesake law that states that the magnetic coefficients of
attraction vary with absolute temperature. Two men with this surname discovered piezoelectricity
(pee-eh-zoh-ee-leck-TRIH-sih-tee). One scientist with this surname discovered properties of thorium at the
same time as G.C. Schmidt and studied pitchblende. One scientist with this surname discovered polonium
and died of leukemia, the same fate as Irene. For 10 points, name this last name shared by Marie and Pierre,
both of whom discovered radium.
ANSWER: Curie
A scientist with this last name, along with Frederic Joliot, won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for turning
boron into nitrogen. Another scientist with this last name created a sensitive electrometer with his brother,
Jacques. Scientists with this last name name a non-SI unit of radioactivity that is equal to 37
gigaBecquerels. It is also the last name of the only person to win two Nobel Prizes in the sciences. For 10
points, what last name was shared by the husband and wife co-discoverers of polonium and radium?
ANSWER: Curie [or Marie Curie; or Pierre Curie; or Irene Joliot-Curie]
One scientist with this last name invented the electrometer to measure charge, which another
scientist with this last name used to study torbernite and pitchblende. One scientist of this name
formulated a namesake law describing the effect of temperature on paramagnetism, and also shared
the (*) 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her and Henri Becquerel for their work in radioactivity. Polonium
and radium were discovered by scientists with, for ten points, what last name, shared by Jacques, Pierre, and
Marie?
ANSWER: Curie (accept first names as long as Curie is given)
One person with this surname synthesized radiophosphorus by bombarding aluminum with alpha particles,
while another contributed to the artificial synthesis of nitrogen. Another person with this name is the
namesake of a law in which the magnetisation of a paramagnetic material is inversely proportional to
temperature; that man also names the temperature above which a ferromagnetic material becomes
paramagnetic. This name's most famous bearer, who hydrolysed pitchblende to isolate radium, is the
namesake of a unit of radioactivity and element number 96. For 10 points, name this surname shared by a
husband and wife who discovered polonium, Pierre and Marie.
ANSWER: Curie
Two people with this last name discovered an effect relating to electric currents in Rochelle salts.
The 1935 winners of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry were the son-in-law and daughter of those people.
The namesake of original SI unit for (*) radioactivity was a member of this family, and the current SI unit
is named for the man with whom this family worked, Henri Becquerel. For 10 points, give this name shared
by a family of Nobel laureates who discovered the elements polonium and radium, most notably Pierre and
his wife, Marie.
ANSWER: Curie
One member of this family names the temperature at which a ferromagnetic material becomes
paramagnetic. Two brothers with this last name discovered piezoelectricity, which would be used in a very
sensitive electrometer to discover two new elements. A husband and wife team with this last name created
new radioactive elements by bombarding elements with alpha particles. One person with this last name is
the only one to have one two Nobels in the sciences. For 10 points, identify this last name of the husband
and wife team that discovered radium and polonium.
ANSWER: Curie [prompt on Joliot-Curie]
One man by this name described a law pertaining to the magnetization of a substance being
proportional to the applied magnetic field. One quantity known by this name was defined according to
the equilibrium concentration of radon; that quantity is equal to thirty-seven billion Becquerel. Another
person who adopted this name discovered artificial radioactivity in boron and aluminum, and another
person of this name won a Nobel Prize in chemistry for her discovery of radium and polonium. For 10
points, identify this name shared by husband and wife Pierre and Marie.
ANSWER: Curie [accept Frederic-Joliot Curie in the first sentence]
This man names a principle giving the symmetry groups of a crystal under an external influence, his
"dissymmetry principle." A constant named for this physicist equals permeability squared times N times the
g-factor squared times J times quantity J plus one, all over quantity three times Boltzmann's constant,
where J is the total angular momentum quantum number. That constant appears in an empirical law named
for him which sets magnetization proportional to magnetic field over temperature and in a formula giving
the susceptibility at a given temperature; the latter is a law he names with Weiss. He and his older brother
Jacques discovered piezoelectricity. The temperature above which ferromagnetism no longer exists is
named for him. For 10 points, name this man who won a Nobel with his wife Marie.
ANSWER: Pierre Curie [prompt on "Curie"]
This value is a linear function of defect concentration at low concentrations according to the spherical
Montroll-Berlin-Kac model. At this value, susceptibility equals infinity according to a law named for this
value and Weiss. Past this value, rotation symmetry in certain materials breaks down in a second-order
phase transition. It is analogous to the Neel point for an "anti" type of material. Above this point,
ferromagnets begin to exhibit paramagnetism. For 10 points, give this temperature that is named for a
French physicist who worked with his wife Marie on radioactivity.
ANSWER: Curie temperature [or Curie point]
The spherical model of Berlin and Kac can be used to show that this quantity varies linearly with defect
concentration. Landau-Ginzburg theory defines four critical exponents related to this quantity, two of which
are the degree of the critical isotherm and the heat capacity. One way of deriving this quantity is through a
theory in which the effective field is replaced by its mean equilibrium value; that method produces
disagreements with experiment of up to a factor of two, and is known as the Weiss theory. When this
quantity is approached from below, the magnetization goes continuously to zero, and rotation symmetry is
broken at this point, which represents a second-order phase transition. Above this analogue of the Neel
point, magnetic ordering is lost. For 10 points, identify this temperature above which a ferromagnet
becomes paramagnetic.
ANSWER: Curie temperature [or Curie point]
In barium titanate, this value is the range in which the positive temperature coefficient effect can occur. This
value is a linear function of defect concentration according to the Montroll-Berlin-Kac spherical model.
This value appears in the denominator of a law which sets a constant divided by the quantity T minus this
value equals chi, which explains why the susceptibility becomes infinite at this value. The mean-field Weiss
theory is often used to compute this value. Past this point, rotation symmetry is broken in a second-order
phase transition and magnetization goes to zero at this point. For 10 points, identify this temperature below
which a paramagnetic material becomes ferromagnetic, named for a French physicist.
ANSWER: Curie temperature
Very large amounts of this phenomenon can result from the acceleration of carriers to free electronhole pairs, a process called avalanche breakdown even in insulators. This quantity is generally
calculated by the product of particle number, (*) charge per particle, cross-section, and drift velocity.
Power owing to this phenomenon is equal to this quantity squared times resistance. Circuits are generally
classified as exhibiting this phenomenon either alternating or direct. For 10 points, name this flow of
electric charge measured in amperes.
ANSWER: current
One form of this quantity is equal to the surface integral of the partial derivative with respect to time
of the electric flux density. That is this quantity's displacement form. The line integral of the
magnetic field intensity is equal to this quantity according to Ampere's Law. The circuit device for
measuring this quantity is connected in (*) series with the circuit. This quantity is inversely proportional
to resistance according to Ohm's Law, where it is equal to divided by resistance. For 10 points, identify this
quantity defined as the rate at which charges flows through a surface and measured in amperes.
ANSWER: current
In frequency engineering, a resonant stub behaves like a kind of circuit with an extreme excess of this
quantity whenever frequency times stub length over propagation velocity is an odd multiple of pi over two.
In p-type semiconductors this phenomenon is best represented as the motion of "holes" where valence-band
electrons otherwise would be present. The Biot-Savart law relates how this phenomenon generates a
magnetic field. Equal to the square root of the ratio power over resistance, for 10 points, name this quantity,
equal to zero for open circuits as they possess two nodes with infinite resistance between, the first time
derivative of charge, symbolized I.
ANSWER: current
One formula to find force multiplies two values of this quantity divided by distance times vacuum
permeability divided by two pi. The double integral of the density of this quantity is equal to the
closed line integral of a magnetic field. This quantity times the differential of length is crossed with
displacement in the Biot-Savart law. One measurement of power squares this quantity and multiplies
it times resistance. This quantity equals voltage divided by resistance according to Ohm's Law. Name
this quantity equal to charge per time that is commonly measured in amperes.
ANSWER: electric(al) current
A more advanced form of this quantity is symbolized J and is called the density of this. In one
case that density is equal to the permittivity of free space times the time derivative of the electric
field. That case was introduced by Maxwell and is called the displacement of this quantity. One law
states that its sum about at a junction is zero. It is measured by an (*) ammeter (AM-ee-ter) and is
equal to voltage divided by resistance according to Ohm's Law. This quantity is measured in amperes. For
10 points, name this rate of charge, which can be viewed as direct or alternating.
ANSWER: current [or current density]
CCDs aemit the "dark" form of this due to random events in the depletion layer. Diodes allow this
quantity to only pass in one direction. The density of this quantity is proportional to the curl of the
magnetic field it exists in, as shown in Ampere's Law. Electric power equals voltage times this quantity,
and Ohm's Law states resistance equals voltage divided by this. For 10 points, name this flow of electric
charge that comes in direct and alternating varieties, measured in amps.
ANSWER: electric current [or amperes until "amps;" do not accept "voltage"]
A more advanced form of this quantity is symbolized J and is called the density of this. In one case that
density is equal to the permittivity of free space times the time derivative of the electric field. That case was
introduced by Maxwell and is called the displacement of this quantity. One law states that its sum about at
a junction is zero. It is measured by an ammeter (AM-ee-ter) and is equal to voltage divided by resistance
according to Ohm's Law. This quantity is measured in amperes. For 10 points, name this rate of charge,
which can be viewed as direct or alternating.
ANSWER: current [or current density]
According to the Drude model, this quantity is proportional to the mean free path between collisions
and the cross-sectional area; another way to calculate this quantity sets it proportional to drift
velocity. The emf induced in a solenoid equals inductance times the time derivative of this quantity.
The magnetic field around an (*) Amperian loop is proportional to the amount of this quantity enclosed
inside the loop. Voltage drop across a resistor equals resistance times this quantity, according to Ohm's
Law. For ten points, name this time derivative of charge, symbolized I and measured in amperes.
ANSWER: electric current (or I; accept electric current density or J before "inductance")
The Biot-Savart law calculates a magnetic field induced by this quantity, of which sums in and out of
nodes are equal according to Kirchhoff's junction rule. Inductance measures a material's opposition
to changes in this quantity, and (*) power equals voltage times it. This equals voltage divided by
resistance, and conventionally is measured in the direction of positive charge. For 10 points, name this
quantity measured in amperes.
ANSWER: electric current
When this quantity is divided by cross-sectional area and multiplied by the magnetic
permeability, it is equal to the Laplacian of the magnetic vector potential. This quantity is
proportional to the product of drift velocity, area, and carrier density, and it is multiplied by the
differential length in the Biot-Savart law. The line integral of a magnetic field around a loop is
proportional to the amount of this quantity (*) enclosed according to Ampere's Law. Kirchoff's junction
rule states that the amount of it leaving a junction is equal to the amount entering, and it is multiplied by
resistance in Ohm's law. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the rate of flow of electric charge that is
symbolized I and measured in amperes.
ANSWER: electric current
A source of this quantity is required in the statement of Norton's theorem, whereas it s not required in
Thevenin's theorem. Magnetic field equals mu-nought over 4pi times the path integral of dl cross r-hat
times this quantity over magnitude of r squared, according to the Biot-Savart law. A term was added to
Ampere's Law to account for the "displacement" type of this quantity. The voltage drop across an
inductor equals inductance times the time-derivative of this quantity, and the power supplied to a
component is equal to this quantity squared times resistance. For 10 points, give this quantity measured
in amps, which by Ohm's Law equals voltage divided by resistance.
ANSWER: electric current
The density of this quantity is equal to the time derivative of the D-field. A device that produces a constant
amount of this quantity is represented by a diamond with an arrow within it. This quantity is the subject of
the skin effect, in which it is preferentially distributed towards the surface of an object due to selfinductance. This quantity, which is measured in an SI base unit, is the subject of Kirchhoff's node rule,
which is an alternate statement of charge conservation. The power dissipated by a wire is proportional to the
square of the "direct" type of this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity that is related to resistance and
voltage by Ohm's law and is measured in amperes.
ANSWER: electric current
The existence of this phenomenon on the surface of certain objects is used to explain the Meissner effect,
and the persistent type of this phenomenon exists in metallic rings that are typically less than a
micrometer in diameter. The density of this quantity equals the curl of magnetic field. This quantity is added
and subtracted in Kirchoff's Junction Rule. Identify this quantity equal to electric potential divided by
resistance commonly represented by an upper case I and measured in Amperes.
ANSWER: electric current
This quantity's density, symbolized by a capital J, is proportional to the electric field over resistivity.
Magnetic field strength is proportional to this quantity by Ampere's law. The amount of this quantity that
enters a junction must equal the amount that leaves according to one of Kirchhoff's circuit laws. Voltage is
equal to the product of resistance and this quantity according to Ohm's law. This quantity is often
represented by a capital I, and it is measured in amperes. For 10 points, name this flow of electric charge
that exists in alternating and direct types.
ANSWER: electric current
James Clerk Maxwell modified Ampere's law by adding a term for the "displacement" type of this
quantity. This quantity can be written as the dot product of its namesake density, symbolized J, and
cross-sectional area. This quantity can be measured using a galvanometer, and according to Ohm's law,
this quantity is equal to voltage divided by resistance. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in
amperes that describes the rate of flow of electric charge.
ANSWER: electric current
The density of this phenomenon, symbolized with a capital J, is equal to the electric field times
conductivity. This non-vector quantity is multiplied by mu-nought over four times pi in the Biot-Savart
law. The unit of this phenomenon shares a name with a law that relates this quantity to the perpendicular
magnetic field that it produces. Thomas Edison and George Westinghouse got into a "war" over the direct
and alternating types of it. For 10 points, name this phenomenon measured in Amperes.
ANSWER: electric current
It's not conductance, but this quantity sharply increases in the punch-through effect because effective width
of the base becomes zero. The forward and reverse transport factors along with the value of two types of
reverse saturated versions of this quantity are the four parameters in the Ebers-Moll model. In classical
mechanics, any variable that satisfies the continuity equation is one of these named for Noether. The density
of this quantity decreases exponentially away from the surface in the skin effect. Inverters and rectifiers are
used to change between two forms of this quantity, which is proportional to the drift velocity. Diodes force
this quantity to pass in a single direction. For 10 points, name this quantity, which, by Ohm's law, gives
voltage when multiplied by resistance, and is measured in amperes.
ANSWER: current [prompt on "I"]
The derivative of this quantity with respect to time multiplied by inductance gives the induced electrical
potential difference of an inductor. One type of this quantity is proportional to the time-derivative of electric
flux; that was added to Ampere's Law by Maxwell and is called the displacement type of this quantity. The
SI unit for this quantity is defined as enough of this quantity to create a certain force between two wires a
meter apart. This quantity is multiplied times electrical potential difference to calculate power and, given a
constant number of volts, varies inversely with resistance according to Ohm's law. Name this electric
quantity measured in coulombs per second, or amperes.
ANSWER: electric current [accept displacement current]
The curl of the magnetization gives the volumetric component of the "bound" form of this quantity. A
quantity with the dimensions of this quantity over area equals epsilon nought times the time derivative of
the electric field. That "displacement" form of this quantity was introduced by Maxwell. The SI unit of this
quantity is defined in terms of a force between two parallel wires, and Ampere's law relates the integral of
the magnetic field to the amount of this quantity enclosed by a loop. This quantity is equal to voltage drop
over resistance according to Ohm's law. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized I and measured in
amperes, the flow of electric charge.
ANSWER: electric current
The value for a field created by this property can be calculated using the Biot-Savart Law (BEE-oh
sah-VAHR). Two wires that have this property pointing in the same direction will be attracted to one
another. The right hand rule gives the direction of this property along the thumb if the direction of the
magnetic field is known. This value is equal to voltage over resistance according to Ohm's Law. For 10
points, name this flow of charge measured in amperes, which can also be direct or alternating.
ANSWER: electric current
A "dark" type of this phenomenon manifests in light-sensitive devices like CCDs even when there is no light
entering the device. A rectifier is used to force this phenomenon to be unidirectional. The areal density of
this quantity equals conductivity times electric field. When these phenomena are "steady", the magnetostatic
approximation holds, whence the magnetic field generated by them is described by the Biot-Savart law.
Inductors resist changes in this quantity. Per Ohm's law, this is the ratio of voltage to resistance. For 10
points, name this quantity which measures the flow of electric charge in units of amperes.
ANSWER: electric current
Harris names a "sheet" of this quantity that serves as a common solution to the MaxwellVlasov equation, and one of these is run through a plasma in a z-pinch apparatus. Dividing this
quantity by area gives a quantity whose four-gradient is set equal to zero in a common continuity
equation in special relativity. The energy stored in an inductor is proportional to the square of
this quantity. This quantity multiplies the cross product of a length infinitesimal with the
displacement vector in the integrand of the Biot-Savart law. Devices used to measure this
quantity are placed in series and have negligible internal resistance. Multiplying this quantity by
V gives power. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the amount of charge flowing in a wire
at any given time.
ANSWER: current
At an interface, the magnitude of discontinuity in the tangential component of the H-field is equal to the
magnitude of this quantity on the interface surface. In any material, the bound form of this quantity is equal
to its free form multiplied by the magnetic susceptibility, and in certain cases one half this quantity dotted
with the vector potential can be used to express the volume energy density of the magnetic field. In the
Coulomb gauge, this quantity is equal to the Laplacian of the magnetic vector potential divided by vacuum
permeability and it is also given by the curl of the H field assuming a time invariant electric field. The
continuity equation for this quantity was used by Maxwell to derive a dynamic correction to Ampere's law,
and this quantity is equal to conductivity times the electric field. For ten points, name this vector quantity
often symbolized J that gives the concentration of current.
ANSWER: volume current density [prompt on J; do not accept or prompt on "current"; do not accept or prompt on "density"]
Shifts in the location of the first peak in the angular power spectrum of the CMB correspond to a
quantity with this name becoming more negative. One parameter partially named for this quantity is
calculated as a sum of the partial derivatives of the Christoffel symbols and vanishes if parallel
transport is path-independent. It is not lambda, but it appears in the Friedmann equations as a
constant multiplied by c squared. Cosmic inflation theory solved the problem of apparent fine-tuning
universe due the universe having a (*) non-zero amount of this quantity. The product of the two principal
values of this is equal to the Gaussian type, and whether it is negative, zero, or positive corresponds to a
hyperbolic, flat, or spherical universe. For 10 points, the Riemann and Ricci tensors describe what
parameter that measures how not-flat something is.
ANSWER: curvature (of the universe, or Riemann curvature tensor; prompt on "density" until Christoffel)
TRIUMF is the largest one of these devices, which can provide strong focusing if the field is allowed to
vary azimuthally. A resonance named for these devices is exploited in Fourier transform mass spectrometry
and Penning traps. Particles in these devices are braked by the Abraham-Lorentz force because the jerk
points opposite the velocity. These devices consist of a vacuum chamber with two barely separated
D-shaped electrodes. The quantity q B over two pi m gives a frequency named for these devices. Varying
the RF field in these devices to correct for relativistic effects gives a synchrotron. For 10 points, name these
accelerators which use electric and magnetic fields to force charged particles into spiral tracks.
ANSWER: cyclotron [do NOT accept "synchrotron"; prompt on particle accelerator]
The namesake parameter of these entities is a frequency given by the magnetic induction times the particle
charge-to-mass ratio. These objects utilize a static axial magnetic field, which causes them to fail when
relativity becomes significant. The main electrodes of these devices are known as "dees" and were initially
used to create betas in the one-megaelectronvolt range by Edmund Wilson. For 10 points, name these early,
particle accelerators named for the sinusoidal time variation of applied voltage and because they are
circular.
ANSWER: cyclotrons
Albereo is at its head, while its brightest star, Deneb, is at its tail. It also contains a namesake x-ray source,
the first black hole discovered. Containing the "northern cross" asterism, this constellation has nine main
stars and borders Cepheus, Draco, and Pegasus. In Greek mythology, Orpheus was transformed into this
bird and placed in the sky next to Lyra, his lyre. FTP, name this constellation, whose name is Latin for
"Swan".
ANSWER: Cygnus
This formation is home to the North American nebula, while the Veil Nebula forms a part of this asterism's
namesake loop, the remnant of a supernova from over 15,000 years ago. Its alpha star is the prototype for a
class of nonradially pulsating variables, and between this constellation and Cepheus lies the fireworks
galaxy, source of the most supernovas on record. The aforementioned alpha star also forms the north-west
vertex of the Summer Triangle. For ten points, name this constellation whose 'head- is visualized as Deneb,
is also known as the Northern Cross and is named for the bird it resembles.
ANSWER: Cygnus or the Swan
This constellation contains the binary with the highest proper motion, which led to its being the first star
whose distance from Earth was calculated, a calculation carried out by Friedrich Wilhem Bessel, who
sometimes lends his name to it. This constellation has contains a variable "P" star that gives its name to a
profile exhibiting emission and absorption of the same line, indicating a gas envelop that is expanding away
from the star. This constellation contains the most powerful radio source in the night sky, which is
designated "A", and this constellation has one of the first black hole systems identified, which is designated
X-1. With beta star Albireo and alpha star Deneb, for 10 points, name this constellation, which contains the
"Northern Cross", whose name is Latin for "Swan".
ANSWER: Cygnus
A source in this constellation was the first radio galaxy to be identified, and it contains the Blinking
Planetary Nebulae. In 1838, Friedrich William Bessel determined its distance from Earth, due to the
high proper motion of its binary star. A namesake loop known as the Veil Nebula is thought to be a
8,000 year old supernova remnant in this constellation, whose portion of the Great Rift stretches
from Aquila to Sagittarius. Albireo, its beta star, lies on the Northern Cross and (*) Deneb is the
"head" of, for ten points, what constellation associated with a Swan?
ANSWER: Cygnus (accept Swan before mentioned)
This object's namesake loop, also known as the Veil nebula, is a 5,000 year old supernova remnant, and
other nebulae in it include the Pelican and North American, which are separated from the Butterfly nebula
by the Northern Coal Sack. Notable stellar objects in this constellation include its beta star Albireo and a
namesake x-ray source designated X-1, believed to be caused by a black hole. For 10 points, name this
constellation, sometimes called the Northern Cross, whose brightest star is Deneb and which is associated
with a swan.
ANSWER: Cygnus [prompt on Northern Cross before mentioned]
In his work Researches on the precession of the equinoxes and nutation of the earth, he provided a
mathematical description of those phenomena, while another work of his analyzed the problem of a
vibrating string, which led him to develop his namesake solutions to the 1-D wave equation, which involve
rightward and leftward travelling waves. His namesake principle applies Newton's second law to virtual
displacements, and calculates the virtual work done on a system. His namesake operator is the second-time
derivative minus the Laplacian, and is symbolized by a box, and he showed that a body in an inviscid,
incompressible fluid should experience no drag, which is his namesake paradox. FTP, identify this
Frenchman who edited most of the science in the Encyclopedie.
ANSWER: Jean le Rond d'Alembert
For an RLC series circuit, a constant associated with this phenomenon can be calculated as attenuation
divided by the resonant angular frequency. That constant associated with this phenomenon is given by
one-half the resistance times the square root of capacitance over inductance. That constant is usually
symbolized zeta or xi and is equivalent to one-half the reciprocal of the Q factor. This phenomenon can
create a function with a quasi-frequency. When there is only one eigenvalue for the differential equation
governing this phenomenon, it occurs critically. It usually results in an exponentially-decaying sinusoidal
position-time graph as amplitude decreases. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which energy is lost
during harmonic oscillations.
ANSWER: damping [or word forms]
If the discriminant of this phenomenon's auxiliary equation is positive, this effect is said to be over-present,
while a zero discriminant gives the critical type. Applied to an oscillator, this phenomenon is equivalent to
one present in RLC circuits, and exponentially decaying oscillations are present when the namesake
coefficient of this phenomenon is less than the product of the maximum amplitude and the spring constant.
This phenomenon can be modeled by the equation m s-double prime equals negative b s-prime minus k s,
where b is the namesake coefficient. Name this phenomenon characterizing motion that eventually trails off,
such as that contrasted with simple harmonic motion.
ANSWER: damping [or damped simple harmonic motion/oscillation; accept word forms; prompt on harmonic motion/oscillation; do not accept or prompt on "simple harmonic motion" or "SHM"; accept dampening or word forms thereof]
A quartic potential term and a term representing this phenomenon appear in the generalized Duffing
equation. One example of this phenomenon involves baryons being dragged by diffusing photons
during recombination. In addition to that variant named for Joseph Silk, forms of this phenomenon
include one in which particles gain energy when traveling close to the phase velocity of a (*) Langmuir
wave. This phenomenon's namesake constant is related to the resonant frequency by the Q or quality factor
for a system, and when the quality factor equals one-half, a system is said to experience the critical version
of this phenomenon, converging to zero as fast as possible. Plasmas exhibit the Landau form of, FTP, what
process that tends to reduce the amplitude of an oscillating system?
ANSWER: Damping
This adjective describes a phenomenon that causes galaxies to move towards the Hydra-Centaurus
Supercluster. Axions may be a "cold" substance described with this adjective, while neutrinos may be the
"hot" form of that substance. This word also describes a period before the first neutral matter was formed.
An agent described by this word is proposed as the cause of the accelerating expansion of the universe, and
a substance described by this word is thought to be made up of weakly interacting massive particles. For 10
points, name this adjective that describes matter and energy undetectable by electromagnetic radiation and
thought to compose most of the universe.
ANSWER: dark [accept any of dark matter, dark energy, Dark Ages, dark flow]
Inversion in Multi Pinned Phase devices suppresses this phenomenon. Pixels that display it to a high
degree are known as hot spikes. It is correlated with the thermal generation of electron-hole pairs
and the collection of valence band electrons within the potential well of a (*) pixel. It can arise when
high cytoplamsic cyclic GMP concentrations maintain cGMP-gated sodium ion channels in an open state
within photoreceptors. For 10 points, name this phenomenon observed in charge-coupled devices in which a
current is observed in the absence of light.
ANSWER: dark current
The existence of this substance in a flat universe would cause the linear term of the late-time
integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect to dominate the higher-order terms. One model of it states that it
initially stays less than the radiation density, then takes on its present characteristics after matter
domination. The Blanco telescope is central to a namesake survey of this substance. Evidence of it
was first found by the High-Z (*) Supernova Search Team and the Supernova Cosmology Project, which
won Schmidt, Pearlmutter, and Reiss the Nobel. The equation of state parameter for this substance must be
less than negative one-thirds and has been measured to around negative one, suggesting that it is accounted
for by the cosmological constant. For 10 points, name this substance which drives the expansion of the
accelerating universe and comprises about 68% of the universe.
ANSWER: dark energy [accept quintessence; do not accept "dark matter"]
A scalar field model of this often has a field that forces the field of this toward the desired energy
density at the present time in a slow rolling fashion, regardless of initial conditions. Trackers that can
be used in that model have pressure equal to the kinetic energy density minus the potential energy
density. Because it causes gravitational potential to vary, this causes anisotropy in the CMB in the
late-time integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect. It has negative pressure, and quintessence is one model of
this, but a more common model involves a constant signified Lambda whose observed value differs
from its theoretical value by (*) 120 orders of magnitude. That theory involving the cosmological constant
postulates that vacuum fluctuations create this as there is a cost to having space. For 10 points, name this
mysterious substance that causes the expansion of the universe and contains 70% of the universe's energy.
ANSWER: dark energy [do not accept "dark matter"]
A recent paper used a Zeldovich-like non-perturbative approach to improve on the Chaplygin gas model of
it. The properties of this phenomenon, which was named by Michael Turner, are described in one of the
Friedmann equations, where it is modified by a scale factor. One form of it appears in the RobertsonWalker metric, and in one model, it is derived from a dynamic scalar field, known as quintessence. Much of
the evidence for it is from Type Ia supernovae, while the constant density version is encompassed by the
cosmological constant. For 10 points, identify this substance comprising 75% of the cosmos, a force that
acts to accelerate the rate of expansion of the universe.
ANSWER: dark energy
The quintom scenario explains this phenomenon's equation of state, and this influences the cosmic
microwave background through the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect. The coincidence problem asks
when this phenomenon began to affect the universe. In 1998, Adam Riess gathered the first evidence
of this phenomenon by showing that type Ia ["one A"] supernovae appeared fainter than predicted.
The cosmological constant has been reintroduced to account for the acceleration caused by this
phenomenon that accounts for two-thirds of all mass-energy. Name this form of energy named for
being difficult to observe directly.
ANSWER: dark energy [do not accept "dark matter"]
One of the two most prominent models of this entity has equation-of-state parameter varying in time
downward from one-third; the other has equation-of-state parameter negative one. One proposed
experiment to measure this would examine acceleration near type (*) Ia supernovas. The flattening of
potentials by this phenomenon should be observable as decreased CMS redshift at late times because the
effect of this entity increases with time. The second aforementioned model corresponds to the subtraction of
a constant from the left-hand side of the Friedmann equation; those models are respectively quintessence
and the cosmological constant. For 10 points, identify this interaction potential that may comprise up to
three-fourths of the universe, a theorized energy proposed to explain the acceleration of universal
expansion.
ANSWER: dark energy
This material causes potential wells and hills that are exhibited in the late-time integrated Sachs-Wolfe
effect. The FLRW metric shows that one accepted model of this material would need to have negative
pressure. In 2011, the Hubble Telescope ruled out a bubble of empty space that was considered an
alternative to this material. Two proposed forms of this material are quintessence and a type described by
the cosmological constant; those two forms are used in describing a stationary and accelerating universe.
For 10 points, name this hypothetical material believed to form the majority of the mass-energy content of
the universe.
ANSWER: dark energy [do not accept "dark matter"; prompt on energy]
The project AMANDA uses neutrino telescopes to find physical evidence of it, while the current
standard model of cosmology is named for "lambda-cold" form of this substance. Vera Rubin
demonstrated that this entity can explain the flatness as distance increases of the [*] galactic rotation
curve. Proposed by Fritz Zwicky, its candidates include MACHOs and WIMPs, and it accounts for more
than 20% of the universe. For 10 points, what matter is named because its existence can only be inferred
from gravity, not observed directly by electromagnetic interaction?
ANSWER: dark matter [prompt on WIMPs until concept]
This concept has been more successful than Modified Newtonian [new-TOE-nee-un] dynamics at
explaining the galaxy rotation problem. An equation relating average kinetic energy to potential energy
called the virial [VEHR-ee-ul] theorem and observations of the Coma cluster were used by Fritz Zwicky in
1933 to predict the existence of this substance. Accounting for about 27 percent of the mass-energy of the
universe, identify this substance that does not absorb or emit light and therefore cannot be seen directly.
ANSWER: dark matter (do not accept "dark energy")
One postulated type of this entity is known as the "self-interacting" type. The galaxy rotation
problem is indirect evidence for its existence. It is grouped into the categories of hot, warm, and cold,
based on the speed at which it travels. Proposed forms of it include massive astronomical compact
halo objects and (*) weakly interacting massive particles, or MACHOs and WIMPs. For 10 points, name
this hypothesized type of matter which accounts for 80% of the matter in the universe.
ANSWER: dark matter [prompt on dark energy until "matter"]
A 2005 Cardiff University study found that the galaxy VIRGOHI21 was predominantly composed of this
material. Zwicky postulated halos of this in the 1930s, and in 1975 Rubin found that anomalous rotation
curves indicating a velocity dispersion uniform with central distance implicated the existence of this.
Neutralinos or other massive neutrinos, categorized as WIMPs, are assumed to be the major constituent of
this substance, since baryonic forms like MACHOs were not found in enough abundance in astronomical
surveys. For ten points, name this substance which makes up 24% of the mass-energy of the universe and
does not interact with light.
ANSWER: dark matter
N-body simulations overestimate the central distribution of this substance, resulting in the cuspy halo
problem. The supersymmetric neutralino is one candidate for this substance, which is believed to be a
weakly interacting massive particle, or WIMP. Fritz Zwicky postulated this substance after observing the
Coma cluster, and its existence can explain why galaxy rotation curves don-t drop off as they should. For 10
points, name this substance that makes up about a quarter of the content of the universe but is not detectable
by electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: dark matter
The NFW profile gives the mass distribution for halos of this substance around galaxies, which is
believed to be responsible for the anomalous shape of galaxy rotation curves. One large piece of evidence
for this substance's existence is the large offset between the center of mass and the center of baryonic mass
in the Bullet Cluster. WIMPs and MACHOs are candidates for this substance, which accounts for about
23% of the mass-energy density of the universe but is unobservable. For 10 points, name this invisible
matter in the universe.
ANSWER: dark matter
One item with this name functions equivalently to Shemhazai's Soul Purge attack and can be charged
up using knots of rust to deal a maximum of 60,000 damage. Cursed items such as the Terra Shield
and the Demon Circlet can be forged from this material by Sunshine the blacksmith in Golden Sun:
The Lost Age. This is the name of Magus's strongest attack in Chrono Trigger. In Futurama: Bender's
Game, all of this (*) material is rendered useless when two energy crystals are brought together. Prior to
that, this substance is used as fuel for the Planet Express and is excreted by Nibbler. In the novels of Philip
Pullman, "dust" is an alternate name for this substance. For 10 points, give the common name of these
things, which also refers to a hypothetical substance in the real universe that doesn-t interact with light.
ANSWER: dark matter
Mikhail Medvedev uses the process of quantum evaporation in the flavor-mixed multi-component
model of this substance he proposed in 2014. A more common model, using the cosmological constant
and particles that move far slower than the speed of light, is the lambda-CDM model. This substance
was hypothesized after observations of the Coma cluster found fewer stars than expected, and most of
this substance is classified as weakly interactive massive particles, or WIMPs. Name this substance
believed to include about 27% of the mass-energy in the universe, and that is often contrasted with
dark energy.
ANSWER: dark matter
Rubin found anomalous rotation curves in spiral galaxies that implied the existence of this that caused
velocity to stay constant with radius. The WMAP experiment excluded the warm type of this, and Zwicky
postulated the existence of halos of this material. Baryonic forms were not found in enough abundance in
astronomical surveys, leading WIMPs to be considered the main component of this, and the existence of its
cold type is part of the (Lambda)CDM model. This substance makes up 24% of the mass-energy of the universe.
For 10 points, name this substance detected through its gravitational effects because it neither emits nor
scatters electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: dark matter
The structure of some objects containing this substance was investigated by Navaroo, Frenk, and White
using N-body simulations. Valentjin and van der Werf suggested that molecular hydrogen accounts for most
of this substance. Douglas Clowe "proved" its existence while studying the Bullet Cluster and gravitational
lensing effects. This substance may be composed of massive compact halo objects or weakly interacting
massive particles. This mostly non-baryonic substance is divided into warm, hot and cold types. For 10
points, name this hypothetical substance that, along with dark energy, makes up around eighty-five percent
of the mass of the universe.
ANSWER: dark matter
These entities were first discovered by the Swiss scientist Fritz Zwicky. The search for the ordinary
counterparts of these entities comprises the massive compact halo object project. These entities are
theorized to be made up of weak interacting massive particles or WIMPS. These entities were originally
known as just missing mass. For 10 points, name this component of the universe whose presence is
detected by its gravitational attraction rather than its luminosity or lack thereof.
ANSWER: dark matter [do not accept dark energy]
An alternative to this substance's existence is Milgrom's MOND theory. Large tanks of a noble gas are
used to detect this substance in the XENON experiments. Vera Rubin's observations of galactic rotation
curves lent credence to its existence, and candidates for this substance include RAMBOS and WIMPS. For
10 points, identify this invisible, massive substance thought to hold galaxies together.
ANSWER: dark matter [do not accept "dark energy"]
E.A. Valentijn and P.P. Van der Werf used their discovery of molecular hydrogen in NGC891 near
Andromeda to explain this, and along with mircolensing it might be explained by the discovery of 38 white
dwarfs in the Milky Way. A large portion of it is known to be non-baryonic, and it was first postulated by
Fritz Zwicky. Some candidates for this include photinos and axions, which are Weakly Interacting Massive
Particles or WIMPS, or Massive Compact Halo Objects or MACHOs. For 10 points, name this substance
that makes up the vast majority of the universe's mass despite not being directly observable.
ANSWER: dark matter
This substance is used to explain why galaxy rotation curves do not drop off as predicted. This
substance was proposed after Fritz Zwicky's observations of the Coma cluster. It contributes roughly 27
percent of the universe's energy density. Black holes and neutron stars were proposed as MACHOs, which,
along with WIMPs, make up the cold form of this substance. For 10 points, name this invisible form of
matter that is thought to exist in space.
ANSWER: dark matter
Replication of this experiment by Thomson involved measuring diffraction pattern on a photographic
plate. This experiment yielded the peak intensity at 54V and 50 degrees, and the experimenters
predicted that measured wavelength would be proportional to the inverse of the square root of
voltage. Since it involved (*) diffraction by a crystal lattice, its results aligned with those predicted by
Bragg's law. This experiment involved firing electrons at a nickel surface and measuring the reflection at
various angles with a Faraday box mounted on an arc. For 10 points, name this experiment that supported
the de Broglie hypothesis by demonstrating the wave nature of matter.
ANSWER: Davisson-Germer experiment
It wasn't performed by Rutherford, but this experiment was independently verified by George Thomson,
who observed weak edges of an Airy disk. The detector in this experiment was a Faraday box that measured
a peak intensity at a 50 degree angle, and it utilized particles which were accelerated in a 54 volt potential.
Its setup involved the firing of electrons at a crystalline nickel target, and its results showed that the
diffraction pattern obeyed Bragg's law, and thus confirmed the de Broglie hypothesis of wave particle
duality. For 10 points, identify this experiment which was performed by two Americans working for Bell
Labs.
ANSWER: Davisson Germer experiment
A significant impetus for the idea behind this experiment and the explanation of its results were provided
by Walter Elsasser. An oven was used in this experiment after the unintended formation of oxide film, and
the results of this experiment were consistent with the predictions of Bragg's Law. This experiment used a
setup involving the firing of electrons at a crystalline nickel target, and it was performed at Bell Labs. An
important conclusion was drawn following the experimental observation of an intensity peak at certain
scattering angles for the electron beam. For 10 points, name this experiment confirming the de Broglie
hypothesis of wave-particle duality.
ANSWER: Davisson-Germer Experiment
Alfred Phillips Jr. of Cornell University disagreed with the conclusions drawn from this experiment, instead
arguing its results can be explained by Atonic Mechanics, a theory based on crystal lattices. A second
experiment performed by its namesakes showed that reflection off of two plates of crystalline material
causes no change in polarization of electrons. The original experiment used a heated filament, parallel plate
voltage accelerators, and a Faraday box, all set up in a vacuum, to show that slow-moving electrons satisfy
Bragg's Law when reflected off of crystallized nickel. FTP, name this experiment whose results can be
explained by constructive interference, thus confirming DeBroglie's hypothesis and demonstrating the wave
nature of electrons, named for two Bell Labs scientists.
ANSWER: Davisson-Germer experiment (accept Germer-Davisson)
This experiment was the first use of the laboratory technique called LEED. This experiment used a
gun consisting of a heated filament with an applied voltage as an accelerator, and this experiment
recorded a crucially accurate wavelength of .167 nanometers using a Faraday box mounted on an
arc. Using Bragg's predictions for (*) x-rays as a reference point, this experiment involved the
measurement of the diffraction patterns of electrons that were fired in a beam at a nickel crystal. For 10
points, name this 1927 experiment conducted by two namesake American physicists that confirmed the de
Broglie hypothesis of wave-particle duality.
ANSWER: Davisson-Germer experiment
This physicist's pilot-wave theory was extended into an interpretation of quantum mechanics that prefers socalled "empty channels" to wavefunction collapse. An experiment to test a statement named for this
physicist featured a heated filament firing electrons at a nickel crystal, and measurement of the scattering
pattern was found to agree with Bragg's law; that experiment was performed at Bell Labs by Davisson and
Germer. A quantity named for him is equal to Planck's constant over momentum. For 10 points, name this
French physicist, whose namesake hypothesis holds that all matter particles have wavelike properties.
ANSWER: Louis de Broglie
One of this man's theories suggests that the Sommerfeld-Wilson quantization is required to hold for an
internal clock to stay in phase with a guiding wave. An equation relating the gradient of the phase of a
wavefunction to the momentum of the particle was used by this man to propose that "pilot wave"
hypothesis. Another theory proposed by this man was confirmed by an experiment in which electrons fired
at a nickel target produced a diffraction pattern predicted by Bragg's law. He suggested that the momentum
of a particle is inversely proportional to its wavelength. For 10 points, identify this French physicist, whose
work laid the foundation for wave-particle duality.
ANSWER: Louis-Victor-Pierre-Raymond duc de Broglie
When the interparticle distance of a gas is less than this value, it obeys Bose-Einstein or Fermi-Dirac
statistics, while when it is greater than this value the gas obeys Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics. The
existence of this quantity was proven in an experiment which used a 54-volt potential difference to
fire electrons at a nickel target; this gave a value of this quantity which agreed with the predictions of
Bragg's Law. First measured for electrons in the Davisson-Germer experiment, this value can be calculated
by dividing Planck's constant by the momentum. For 10 points, name this quantity which explains why
particles have wavelike behavior, a wavelength named for a German physicist.
ANSWER: [Thermal] De Broglie Wavelength
The translational partition function of a single particle in a container is equal to the volume of the
container divided by the cube of this quantity. The Sackur-Tetrode equation only applies when the
density of particles times this quantity cubed is much less than one. For an ideal gas, one form of this
quantity is equal to Planck's constant divided by the square root of quantity two pi times mass times
Boltzmann's constant times temperature. (*) The energy of a particle is equal to 1240 electron voltnanometers divided by this quantity for the particle. The existence of this quantity was confirmed by an
experiment which fired electrons at a nickel target and observed a Bragg diffraction pattern; that experiment
was conducted by Davisson and Germer. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to Planck's constant
divided by momentum which represents the wavelength of a particle's matter wave.
ANSWER: de Broglie wavelength (accept thermal wavelength or thermal de Broglie wavelength before "electrons"; prompt on "wavelength" before mentioned; "wavelength" unnecessary after mentioned)
This theory led to the formation of a quantum interpretation of the Zeno effect. For an ideal gas, the
quantity described by this theory is evaluated by dividing the square root of the product of the Boltzmann
constant, mass and temperature of the gas, and two pi into Planck's constant. One confirmation for it came
from Otto Stern's experiments with Helium atoms, though it was first confirmed when high energy electrons
were fired at a nickel atom in the Davisson-Germer experiment. Described by a French physicist, for 10
points, identify this theory which describes an inverse relationship between wavelength and momentum and
thus explains the wave-particle duality of matter.
ANSWER: de Broglie Hypothesis (accept: de Broglie Wavelength)
In an alternating electric field, this man names the equation that gives permittivity as the high
frequency limit permittivity plus the difference between the low and high limit all over one plus i
times frequency times relaxation time. He described the attenuation of scattering due to thermal
motion as the exponential of minus a term proportional to the average of the squared scattering
vector with Waller. He developed a model with a temperature-cubed dependence that incorporated phonon
energy contributions, thereby improving on Einstein's, for predicting the specific heat of solids. For 10
points, name this physicist who names the length scale of a plasma.
ANSWER: Peter Joseph William Debye
A parameter named for this man approximately the cube root of the number density times the sound
speed, and gives the maximum oscillation frequency for phonons, which also underpin this his model
of heat capacity. He has a namesake that describes the attenuation of scattering in the Mossbauer
Effect, named for him and Waller. Another parameter named for this man is equal in cgs to the square
root of the kinetic temperature over the charge squared times the number density. For 10 points, name this
physicist with a namesake screening length in plasmas and colloids, and for a theory of electrolyte activity
that uses that length scale, devised with Huckel.
ANSWER: Peter Debye
When change in permittivity divided by "one plus i times frequency times relaxation time" is added to
infinite-frequency permittivity, the result is this man's relaxation. The Dulong-Petit law is accurate when
temperature is higher than his namesake temperature for a solid, while his namesake shielding of plasma
fully occurs at his namesake length for the plasma. He may be more famous for an equation used to
calculate activity of an ion from its concentration in solution, which he names with Huckel. For 10 points,
identify this Dutch-American physicist, who names the units for measuring dipole moments.
ANSWER: Peter Debye
This man corrected the Clausius-Mossotti equation to account for permanent dipoles in a gas, and he
confirmed the existence of the acusto-optic diffraction with Sears. With Lorenz and Mie, he lends his name
to a model of light scattering by a spherical particle. His temperature is defined as his frequency multiplied
by Planck's quantum constant, divided by Boltzmann's constant. That frequency is the highest-frequency
normal mode of vibration in a crystalline lattice, and with Ivar Waller he lends his name to a factor that
describes the disorder in a crystal. Together with Huckel, he developed a model of the behavior of
electrolyte solutions. For ten points, identify this Dutch scientist who developed a model of heat capacity
employing phonons, and who gives his name to the unit for electric dipole.
ANSWER: Peter Debye
This quantity, squared, is multiplied by three k squared in a rewriting of the Bohm-Gross Dispersion
Relation. When cubed and multiplied by four pi n, it gives a parameter that is greater than one for
weakly-coupled materials and less for strongly-coupled ones. A formula for this quantity can be
derived by solving Poisson's equation for phi after imagining a small (*) point charge affecting an
equilibrium electron distribution. This quantity, which is proportional to the square root of absolute
temperature over the electron density, gives the characteristic thickness of a double layer and arises from
the fact that opposite charges shield each other. For 10 points, name this characteristic length important in
plasma physics.
ANSWER: Debye length
A threshold that is equivalent to the lowest value for this measurement is set at one thousand hertz. The
smallest changes in value for this measurement are based on a just noticeable difference, which decreases
as this value increases. The values of this measurement are based on a logarithmic scale so that a change in
intensity by a factor of one thousand will result in an increase in value by 30. Exposure to values of this
measurement over 140 will cause damage to a person's hearing. For 10 points, name this system of
measuring the intensity of sound.
ANSWER: decibels
Applying perturbation theory to states with this property causes the denominator to go to zero. If a
system has this property in the ground state, the entropy is nonzero at absolute zero. For a particle in
a multidimensional box, this condition occurs when more than one dimension of the box is the same.
This property is removed in octahedral complexes by elongation along the z axis in the Jahn-Teller
effect. The Zeeman and Stark effects (*) break this property via splitting. It occurs when the Hamiltonian
of a system has multiple eigenvectors with the same eigenvalue. The pressure arising from this
phenomenon balances gravity in a white dwarf below the Chandrashekar limit. For 10 points, name this
condition in which a single energy level has more than one state.
ANSWER: degenerate [or degeneracy; accept word forms]
Low-mass AGB stars temporarily contain this kind of matter after their helium has been entirely consumed;
this matter is then eliminated by a carbon or oxygen flash while in low-mass stars, a similar process called a
helium flash signals the beginning of helium burning and the elimination of this kind of matter. Pressure in
this kind of matter is independent of temperature, but increases non-linearly as the four-thirds or five-thirds
power of the density. That namesake pressure arises from the need to elevate fermions into higher energy
states due to the impossibility of multiple fermions occupying the same quantum state. For 10 points,
identify this kind of matter found in strange stars, white dwarfs, and neutron stars, supported against
gravitational collapse not by thermal energy, but rather by the Pauli exclusion principle.
ANSWER: degenerate matter [accept neutron-degenerate matter, electron-degenerate matter, degenerate helium, degenerate carbon, degenerate oxygen and other more specific answers containing degenerate throughout]
Conductivity times the electric field give the current type of this quantity. The square root of bulk
modulus over this quantity gives the speed of sound in a fluid. Also, in fluids, this quantity times
gravitational acceleration times height yields pressure. At room temperature, osmium has the highest value
for it. It must be smaller for an object in a fluid than the fluid it is in for the object to float. For 10 points,
name this physical quantity equal to mass per unit of volume.
ANSWER: density [prompt on rho]
For a string with constant tension, the speed of a wave varies inversely with the square root of this
quantity. Dynamic pressure is calculated by multiplying half of this quantity times speed squared.
Pressure plus dynamic pressure plus this quantity times gravitational acceleration times height is
constant according to Bernoulli's principle. This quantity is the reciprocal of specific volume. This
quantity is constant for incompressible flows of liquids, and under normal conditions, osmium and
iridium have the highest values for this quantity among stable elements. Name this quantity equal
to mass divided by volume.
ANSWER: density [accept linear density before "specific volume"; accept (volumetric) mass density after "specific volume"]
The Fermi wave-vector is proportional to the cube-root of one form of this value for electrons. The
continuity equation for fluids has a term for its time derivative. In a barotropic fluid, the pressure is only a
function of this quantity, which is constant for an incompressible fluid. According to Pascal's law, the
change in pressure is equal to g delta h times this value. For an ideal gas, this property is equal to P times
the molecular weight over RT. Specific gravity is a ratio of this to a reference value of this quantity. This
value is symbolized by a lowercase rho. For 10 points, name this property that, for mass, is the mass per
unit volume.
ANSWER: density [prompt on rho before mentioned; or electron density]
Waves of this quantity are responsible for maintaining the structure of spiral galaxies, according to the
theory of Lin and Shu. The critical version of this property for the universe is used in computing a
parameter also named for this property, denoted omega, which is approximately equal to one. In one
formulation of Bernoulli's principle, the dynamic pressure is given as one-half this times fluid velocity
squared. This intensive property is constant in an isochoric process. A hydrometer can determine the
specific gravity, and thus, this quantity, which determines whether or not an object will float in a fluid. For
10 points, what quantity is given as mass divided by volume?
ANSWER: mass density
According to the continuity equation, in the absence of accumulation, the partial derivative of this
quantity with respect to time equals net flux. It is multiplied by the derivative of velocity in the
Navier-Stokes equation. For a gas, it is equal to molar mass times pressure over the gas constant
times temperature. In one formulation of Bernoulli's principle, the absolute pressure term is divided
by it. Its ratio for two different substances is called specific (*) gravity. Buoyant force is the product of
gravity, the volume displaced, and this property. For ten points, name this quantity symbolized rho, which
for water is one gram per milliliter and equals mass over volume.
ANSWER: density
In polytropic equations, the pressure is given as proportional to this quantity raised to some power, while
the virial expansion writes the pressure over the temperature in terms of powers of this quantity. In
cosmology, the quantity "3 times the square of the Hubble constant over quantity 8 pi times the gravitational
constant," is known as the "critical" type of this quantity. The time-derivative of this quantity balances the
divergence of its flux in fluid continuity equations. This quantity appears multiplied by both the square of
the velocity and the gravitational acceleration times the height as a counterbalance to the pressure in
Bernoulli's equation. Multiplying the volume and gravitational acceleration in the expression for buoyant
force, for 10 points, identify this term which denotes how much of something there is per unit volume.
ANSWER: density
Along with fluid velocity and characteristic length, this quantity makes up the inertial forces used to
calculate Reynold's number. The void ratio is necessary to finding the bulk type of this quantity. The
specific gravity is determined by comparing this quantity between a substance and a reference. Multiplying
this quantity by gravitational acceleration and volume gives the buoyant force on an object in a liquid. For
10 points, name this quantity symbolized rho that is defined as mass divided by volume.
ANSWER: density
The Schiehallion experiment attempted to calculate the mean value of one example of this quantity by
measuring a nearby mountain's effect on a pendulum. The time derivative of an operator named for this
quantity is proportional to the commutator of the operator with the Hamiltonian, according to von
Neumann. The expectation value of any observable of a system is equal to the trace of the product of the
observable's operator with a matrix named for this quantity. For an electric field's energy, this quantity is
given as vacuum permeability times electric field squared over two; for an ideal gas, it equals molar mass
times pressure divided by the gas constant and temperature. For 10 points, name this value that can be
measured using Archimedes- principle, which equals mass divided by volume.
ANSWER: mass density [or density of the Earth; or density matrix; or density operator; or energy density]
In astronomy, the Toomre Q parameter is inversely proportional to this property of a gas surface. The
Lane-Emden equation contains a theta term raised to some index, where the theta term measures this
quantity. Polytropes are solutions to that equation in which pressure is dependent upon this quantity.
Structures that are named after this quantity are driven by orbital resonances that are multiples of the forcing
frequency, which is a Lindblad resonance. Lin and Shu proposed that those structures of this name solve the
winding problem of the arms of spiral galaxies. The escape velocity for an object equals the speed of light
when this quantity is equal to mass divided by the volume of a sphere given by the corresponding
Schwarzschild radius. For 10 points, identify this quantity, often designated rho, that is extremely high for
black holes, because matter has been squeezed together so tightly.
ANSWER: density [accept density waves; prompt on "pressure" before mention; prompt on "waves"]
Dividing the dynamic viscosity by this quantity gives the kinematic viscosity. The drag force is
proportional to the product of the square of velocity, the drag coefficient, the cross sectional area,
and this. One term of Bernoulli's principle has pressure divided by this quantity, and this quantity
varies in (*) compressible flows. Archimedes' principle states that ratio of the weight of an object to the
weight of displaced fluid is equal to the ratio of this quantity for the object to this quantity for the fluid. The
gauge pressure is equal to this quantity times little-g times height in accordance with Pascal's law. This
value is symbolized rho. For 10 points, name this quantity of a fluid, equal to the mass per unit volume.
ANSWER: mass density
The polarization type of this quantity is proportional to the average electric dipole moment. The electric
field times the electrical conductivity yields the "current" form of this quantity, which is also given as
current over cross-sectional area. One type of this quantity is a useful tool for comparing the efficiencies of
fuels; that energy variety of this quantity is equal to useful energy divided by volume. Specific gravity
relates this quantity between two substances. Name this quantity, which, in its simplest form, is stated as
mass over volume.
ANSWER: density
In one term appearing in the general form of the Navier-Stokes equation, the gradient of pressure is divided
by this other physical property. The two elements of the periodic table with the highest value of this
property are iridium and osmium, and this property is lower in ice than in liquid water. In equations, it is
represented by the lowercase Greek letter rho, and for a given substance, the ratio of this property to that of
water is called specific gravity. For 10 points, identify this physical property, defined as the mass of an
object divided by its volume.
ANSWER: Density [prompt on "rho" before mentioned]
The commutator of the Hamiltonian and an object with this name is equal to i h-bar times the time
derivative of that object, according to an equation named for von Neumann and Liouville. That
matrix with this name describes mixed states in quantum mechanics. The continuity equation in fluid
dynamics states that the negative partial of this quantity with respect to time is equal to the
divergence of the product of this quantity and the (*) fluid velocity; that is a consequence of the
conservation of mass. The conductivity times the electric field gives this quantity for electric current,
according to Ohm's law. This quantity for electric current is equal to the electric current per unit area. For
10 points, name this quantity usually symbolized rho, whose average value is given by mass divided by
volume.
ANSWER: density
The Mach number is proportional to this quantity raised to the one-half power. It's not volume, but
this quantity times the derivative of pressure with respect to this quantity gives the bulk modulus.
The kinematic viscosity is equal to the dynamic viscosity divided by this quantity. Porosity is equal to
one minus the ratio of the "bulk" and "particle" versions of this quantity. The pressure term in the
(*) Bernoulli equation is equal to the change in pressure divided by this quantity, causing the difference in
pressure between two points in a static fluid to equal this quantity times "little g" times the height
difference. The ratio of this quantity for a fluid to this quantity for water is the fluid's specific gravity. For
10 points, name this quantity equal to a material's mass divided by its volume.
ANSWER: mass density
This quantity times the derivative of pressure with respect to this quantity is equal to a substance's bulk
modulus. The degeneracy pressure of matter is a function only of this intensive property of the matter.
Surfaces along which this property is constant are called "isopycnic". The specific volume is the reciprocal
of this quantity. This property is constant through the entirety of a homogeneous substance. Little g times
the volume of a submerged object times this property of the displaced fluid equals the buoyant force,
according to Archimedes's principle. For 10 points, name this quantity that equals mass per unit volume.
ANSWER: volumetric mass density [accept number density]
It began to form at 1.5 minutes, prior to the completion of neutron decay and in muon-catalyzed fusion it
captures a muon to enter an excited state. As a consequence of transition state theory, its presence can slow
down a reaction by a factor of six, a phenomenon known as its primary kinetic effect. Gilbert Lewis
published 26 papers on its separation and properties while lamps of this type utilize the stable arc discharge
of a gas to produce electromagnetic radiation in the UV region. Due to its magnetic moment and spin,
solvents containing it appear invisible in proton NMR. For 10 points, a proton, neutron, and electron
collectively compose what isotope of hydrogen that, along with tritium, forms the basis of the most
prevalent fusion reaction used to generate nuclear power.
ANSWER: deuterium or hydrogen-2 (prompt on isotope of hydrogen)
One character in this work mocks the study of Virgil and Ovid, suggesting that no book bigger than
the alphabet is needed to answer questions about life. That character draws two points and asks
which of three paths represents the true distance between them. This work imagines a man below
deck on a ship who can-t tell whether the ship is docked or not, presenting an argument further
bolstered by considering the occurrence of (*) tides. Divided into four "days" of arguments between
Sagredo, the Aristotle fanboy Simplicio, and the autobiographical Salviati, its publication resulted in the
author spending his last days under house arrest for heresy. For 10 points, name this work which defends the
heliocentric model championed by its author Galileo.
ANSWER: Dialogue Concerning Two Chief World Systems [or Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo; be lenient about the title, particularly if they add "the" before "two"]
In 2007, researchers at the International Space Station used this property to grow crystals in ways that
counteract Earth's gravity. Haberditzl's ABIS system and Pascal's constants describe a material's tendency
toward this property, which MO theory predicts should occur in molecules with paired electrons. One of its
best known consequences was initially thought to violate Earnshaw's Theorem, and it is described as a
molecular version of Lenz's law. Exhibited strongly in pyrolitic graphite and bismuth, its perfect form is
found in superconductors, and materials exhibiting it can be levitated. For 10 points, name this induced
form of magnetism that opposes an applied magnetic field.
ANSWER: Diamagnetism
The fact that confined plasmas exhibit this phenomenon on short time scales cannot be explained by
resistive MHD. This behavior underlies the oscillations in the de Haas-van Alphen effect because free
electrons exhibit this behavior with a magnitude proportional to the Fermi wave vector according to
a result of Landau. Objects exhibiting this behavior have bound current density anti-parallel to the
applied vector potential; consequently, such objects have negative (*) susceptibility and permeability
less than that of free space. Eddy currents induce this phenomenon in conductors subject to magnetic flux,
so such conductors expel magnetic field lines. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which an object
opposes an external magnetic field.
ANSWER: diamagnetism [accept word forms like diamagnetic; prompt on forms of magnetism]
The primary quantity characterizing this phenomenon for a 3D free electron gas equals minus one
third times a similar quantity named for Pauli according to a result derived by Lev Landau. It's not
NMR, but this phenomenon arises from Larmor precession in a model by Langevin. This
phenomenon occurs when the orbits of the electrons in a material form small current loops in an
application of Lenz's Law on the atomic scale. This phenomenon is characterized by a negative (*)
susceptibility. Bismuth and graphite exhibit a very strong form of this phenomenon. Superconductors
exhibit a perfect form of this phenomenon in the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which a material in an external magnetic field creates an internal field that opposes the external field.
ANSWER: diamagnetism
The ABIS system computes values for this phenomenon, while a phenomenon opposing this one was
studied by Van Vleck and has a temperature-independent version. Pascal's constants can be used to
compute empirical values for this property. According to Langevin's model for this phenomenon, it can be
explained as arising from Lenz's law, and this phenomenon is notably exhibited by bismuth and other
substances with no unpaired electrons. The Meissner effect can be viewed as an extreme version of this
phenomenon. FTP, name this phenomenon displayed by materials that generate an induced magnetic field
which opposes the applied field, making it different than the opposing phenomenon of paramagnetism.
ANSWER: diamagnetism
The tendency for it to occur is explained by Pascal's constants, and one consequence of this
phenomenon was denied by Earnshaw's theorem, which has been disproven thanks to the static
levitation of (*) pyrolytic graphite. All conductors exhibit this due to eddy currents caused by the Lorentz
Force, while superconductors possess a particularly strong version as a result of the Meissner effect. Best
exemplified in atoms with paired electrons, it is most strongly seen among elements in bismuth. For 10
points, what is the name given to the weak magnetic field formed as a result of resistance to an external
field.
ANSWER: Diamagnetism
The Bohr van Leeuwen theorem states that any plasma with a kinetic equilibrium will reach a state
where this phenomenon is zero. Free electron gases display the Landau type of this property, and
materials exhibiting it have negative susceptibility. Superconductors display the "perfect" variety of
this property in the Meissner Effect. This property is often described as Lenz's Law applied on a
microscopic scale, and it was originally though to violate Earnshaw's Theorem. This property is exhibited
by pyloric graphite and bismuth, and materials displaying it can be levitated for a few seconds. For 10
points, name this form of magnetism that expels applied magnetic fields.
ANSWER: diamagnetism [prompt on magnetism]
The losses in these types of materials depend only on the power factor as long as applied voltage and
frequency are constant, and result due to the fact that current does not lead voltage by exactly 90 degrees.
This term describes a type of heating that occurs in materials such as thermosetting glue that are subjected
to a high-frequency field, and if the polarizability of a material is known, the Clausius-Mosotti relation
allows the calculation of this type of constant. Intrinsic, thermal, and discharge are all types of a namesake
"breakdown" which occurs in these materials. Referring to materials characterized by the property of
capacitance, for ten points, identify this general term for insulators wedged into a capacitor.
ANSWER: dielectrics
The relationship between polarizability and a constant governing these materials is related by the ClausiusMossotti equation. Electric fields in these materials are replaced by a displacement field symbolized "D" to
account for free charge, and a decrease in resistance in these materials in response to a large electric field is
its namesake "breakdown." For 10 points, identify these highly polarized materials with a namesake
constant, a type of insulator often placed between the plates of a capacitor in an electric field.
ANSWER: dielectric
Crystals with this property can theoretically experience second sound such as in semi-metal bismuth. These
materials are tested by a HIPOT. Hafnium oxide acts as one of these in modern CPUs. The tangent of delta
or the dissipation factor describes the energy lost as heat in one of these substances. The macroscopic
properties of one of these materials is related to microscopic polarizability by the Clausius-Mossotti
relation. This property is quantified by one plus chi over epsilon. A material is one of these if its valence
and conduction bands are separated by at least 3 electron volts. At sufficient field strength, these
breakdown. They are polarized by an electric field. This sort of material is found between the plates of a
capacitor. For 10 points, name this property of a material to act as electric insulators.
ANSWER: dielectrics [prompt on insulator]
Cyclic olefin copolymer fibers are often used since they have a low value of this. A relaxation in the crystal
structure of ceramic materials causes this value to "age" over time, and it increases greatly at the Curie
point. The value for polar substances such as water is extremely high, while non-polar substances have a
lower value. It is measured by the ratio of capacitance with the tested material between the plates to the
capacitance with a vacuum between the plates. FTP name this ratio of a material to carry an alternating
current compared to a vacuum.
ANSWER: Dielectric Constant
For an ionic crystal, the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation connects the square of a ratio of phonon frequencies
to the ratio of the static and high-frequency values of this quantity. Equations named for Debye and Onsager
allow for its calculation for polar materials by accounting for orientational effects, while the ClausiusMossotti relation can be used for most non-polar isotropic materials. Semiconductor manufacturers are
particularly interested in "high-k" materials with larger values of this quantity than silicon dioxide's 3.9,
which would enable further miniaturization of transistors and circuits. FTP, name this ratio between an
insulator's permittivity and the permittivity of free space, which, along with relative permeability,
determines a material's interactions with electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: dielectric constant (accept dielectric function, relative permittivity, prompt on epsilon)
One method to calculate this uses the asymptotic free particle solution of the spherical Schrodinger
equation, which is then compared to the sum of the many spherical plane waves with different
angular momentum, and is thus known as the method of partial waves. Because this quantity
depends on the cosecant, at certain angles, the glory effect can occur. The optical theorem states that
this is equal to the imaginary part of the scattering amplitude. A very crappy but fast perturbative
method to get this quantity is the (*) Born approximation. For a hard sphere, it is equal to radius squared
divided by 4, and the Klein-Nishina formula gives this value for Compton scattering. Classically defined
entirely by velocity and impact parameter, for 10 points, is which quantity that classically gives the area
seen by an incoming particle?
ANSWER: differential cross section [accept cross sectional area]
Light beams interacting with acoustic waves in quartz results in the Schaefer-Bergmann type of this
phenomenon. The fields resulting from this phenomenon for two arrangements with the same geometry are
complementary according to Babinet's principle. Plane wave fronts produce patterns named for the
Fraunhofer type of this phenomenon, and concentric circles are the patterns produced by the Fresnel type of
it. This phenomenon leads to a formula for the limitation in angular resolution known as the Rayleigh
criterion, and it can also create Airy disks. Conditions that produce this phenomenon are governed by
Bragg's Law, and in Young's double-slit experiment, it caused each slit to act as a line source. For 10 points,
name this bending of waves around the edge of an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction
According to Babinet's (BAB-in-AYS) principle, the results of this phenomenon are the same whether
the object encountered is a narrow solid object or a narrow slit. When that slit is a circular aperture
(APP-er-tyur), Airy disks form due to this phenomenon. Thomas Young's double-slit experiment used this
phenomenon to show the wave-like nature of light. For 10 points, name this bending of light around an
obstacle, which should not be confused with reflection or refraction.
ANSWER: diffraction [do not accept "refraction"]
Optical power resulting from this phenomenon is maximized in an echelette grating. Von Laue
pioneered the use of X-rays undergoing this phenomenon to study crystal structures. This
phenomenon led to interference when electrons were fired at a nickel target in the (*)
Davisson-Germer experiment. It also created dark and light spots from interfering light waves in the double
slit experiment. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which light bends around obstacles.
ANSWER: diffraction [or interference before mention]
Two types of this phenomenon are named for Fraunhofer and Fresnel. A form of this phenomenon
named for William Lawrence Bragg and William Henry Bragg occurs when light passes through a
crystalline structure. Monochromatic coherent light is needed to observe the interference patterns
caused by this phenomenon in Young's double-slit experiment, and this phenomenon is used to separate
wavelengths of light in a namesake "grating." For 10 points, name this phenomenon where light bends
around obstacles.
ANSWER: diffraction
This phenomenon results from light interacting with sound waves in transparent crystals in its SchaefferBergmann variety, and this phenomenon may lead to the creation of Airy disks. Fresnel approximations
describe the near-field variety of this phenomenon, while the far-field variety is named for Fraunhofer. The
Rayleigh criterion describes how this phenomenon limits the resolving ability of a lens, while Bragg's law
governs this phenomenon between crystal planes. This phenomenon caused each slit to act as a line source
in Young's double slit experiment. For ten points, name this phenomenon, the apparent bending of waves
around an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction
The fields formed due to this phenomenon in the presence of complementary screens are related by
Babinet's principle. A resolution limit due to this phenomenon corresponds to the radius of the first zero of
the Airy disk and is named after Rayleigh. Davisson and Germer showed that electrons undergo this
process, whose near-field and far-field results are given by the Fresnel and Fraunhoffer formalisms. For 10
points, identify this process that results in interference fringes when light is passed through a narrow slit and
is the bending of light by an aperture.
ANSWER: diffraction
Although having nothing to do with signal processing, solving one version of this phenomenon
relies on finding the Fourier transform of the rect function. A mathematical formalism of it takes the
Green's function of Helmholtz's equation, then substituting into that formalism's namesake integral
theorem; that formalism is Kirchoff's scalar theory of this process. Its knife-edge version is governed
by a rule stating that every point of a front is the source of a spherical wave, called (*) Huygens
principle. This phenomenon creates the Arago spot when occurring through a circular aperture, a setup
described by the formula 1.22 times lambda over D, which also gives the Rayleigh criterion for the limit of
resolution imposed by this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this effect in which light bends around an
object.
ANSWER: diffraction [prompt on "interference"]
The demonstration by Stern and Estermann that hydrogen and helium atoms undergo this
phenomenon supported the work of Louis de Broglie. Karl Weissenberg and Max von Laue used
this phenomenon to explain the creation of spot patterns on film. The light source and screen are
both very far from where this phenomenon takes place in the Fraunhofer type of it. Spectrometers
often use gratings that produce this phenomenon. This phenomenon and interference are used to
distinguish waves from particles and are used to explain double-slit interference patterns. Name this
spreading-out of waves after they pass through a narrow hole.
ANSWER: diffraction [accept word forms; do not accept "refraction"; prompt on scattering]
Its Schaefer-Bergmann form results from interactions with sound waves in a crystal. A Talbot-Lau
interferometer may be adapted to detect fullerenes undergoing this process, and the knife-edge effect is an
extension of the half-plane problem of this phenomenon. A circular aperture produces an Airy disc through
this process, and far-field and near-field forms of this process are named for Fraunhofer and Fresnel.
Interference patterns from two closely spaced slits in Young's experiment result from this phenomenon. For
10 points, name this interaction in which light bends around an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction
One description of this phenomenon uses Green's theorem to solve the wave equation at a point based on
its solutions at all points on a surface around the point; that is Kirchoff's formulation. This phenomenon
occurring at a knife edge is the subject of Huygens principle, which in another system creates the Airy disk.
It can occur through gratings, single slits, or circular apertures. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which light bends around an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction
The Cornu spiral is used in certain integrals to approximate this effect, and resolution in this
phenomenon is determined by the Rayleigh criterion. When the aperture size squared over wavelength
times distance, also called the Fresnel number, is much less than one, a form predominates named for
Fraunhofer. An equation relating spacing to wavelength and a pair of angles governs its namesake
gratings. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which light bends around obstacles and spreads out
at apertures.
ANSWER: diffraction
The far-field form of this phenomenon is named for Fraunhofer. The Rayleigh criterion gives a resolution
limit due to this phenomenon, whose namesake "grating" yields interference patterns. The Huygens
principle considers every point of a wave front as a wave source to rationalize this phenomenon. Young's
double slit experiment saw interference partially as a consequence of this phenomenon occurring when the
light passed through the slits. Its effects can be mathematically determined by setting d sine of theta equal to
n lambda. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, the bending of light around a barrier.
ANSWER: diffraction
One finds the angular resolution, limited by this phenomenon, by setting the sine of the angular
resolution equal to one point two two times the wavelength over the lens aperture diameter; that
relation is the Rayleigh criterion. One feature resulting from this phenomenon is the (*) Airy disk.
Models of this phenomenon include equations named for Fraunhofer and Fresnel for far and near field. One
prominent experiment, foundational to quantum mechanics, that employed this phenomenon was Young's
double slit experiment. For 10 points, name this process whereby light responds to encountering an obstacle
by bending or spreading.
ANSWER: diffraction
One theory describing this phenomenon predicts an intensity distribution proportional to the square of
the sinc function. The pattern produced by this effect is the same as that produced by the complementary
body according to Babinet's principle. The first zero of the sinc function helps define a limit by which a
system is limited by this phenomenon. One version of this phenomenon produces a feature of angular size
approximately equal to 1.22 times lambda over D, called the Airy disk; that version occurs through a
circular aperture. Huygens principle is often used to study this phenomenon, which occurs when light
shines through an opening of any kind. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a wave bends
around an object.
ANSWER: diffraction
One equation describing this phenomenon sets the sine of theta equal to the extreme path difference over
the distance, and another equation employs a factor of 1.22. That equation is the Rayleigh criterion, which
gives minimum resolution due to this phenomenon. Rosalind Franklin employed this phenomenon with Xrays to obtain images of DNA. Airy disks are formed by this process, of which there are Fraunhofer and
Fresnel types, and it is described using Bragg's law. It is explained using a principle that treats every point
on a wavefront as a wave source, which is named for Huygens. For 10 points, name this term for the
bending of light around an obstacle.
ANSWER: Diffraction
A form of this phenomenon that results from interactions with sound waves in crystals is named for
Schaefer and Bergmann, and one that occurs on sound waves in water is named for Debye and Sears. A
form of this phenomenon in crystalls is named for Bragg. Fresnel names the near-field form of this
phenomenon, while Fraunhofer names the other regime.The smearing of Airy disks produced during this
phenomenon is a criterion for resolving the output proposed by Rayleigh, and it is based on the principle
that a point on a propagating wavefront can produce smaller waves. For 10 points, name this phenomenon
inn which light appears to bend around an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction
Schaefar and Bergmann name a type of this phenomenon governing sound waves in crystals, and when this
phenomenon occurs for a circular opening it creates an Airy disc. Near-field and far-field varieties of this
phenomenon depend on the value of the Fresnel number, who names a type of this phenomenon contrasting
the "Fraunhofer" type. This phenomenon is predicted by Huygens principle when observing a wave move
through a single slit, and Young's double slit experiment showed interference by using this phenomenon.
For 10 points, name this bending of waves around obstacles.
ANSWER: diffraction
One variety of this effect produces Kossel lines, and Kikuchi lines are a result of this effect in
transmission electron microscopes. Theories of this phenomenon include Rayleigh-Sommerfield, and
one device which makes use of it consists of concentric alternating black and white rings. One
equation describing it equates order times wavelength with twice the distance between crystal planes
times the (*) angle, a law named for Bragg, and when this phenomenon occurs through a circular aperture it
produces elliptical zones named for Fresnel. When this effect occurs in the far-field limit, it is named for
Fraunhofer. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, the bending of light around obstacles.
ANSWER: diffraction
This phenomenon creates the Airy disk, and its Fraunhofer variety is governed by an equation which
relates relative intensities. In crystals it is governed by Bragg's law, and this phenomenon was observed in
electrons in the Davisson-Germer experiment. This phenomenon is a consequence of Huygens's principle,
and this concept in optics can be studied using a namesake dispersive grating. For 10 points, identify this
bending of light around obstacles.
ANSWER: diffraction
A standing electromagnetic wave can induce this phenomenon in the Kapitsa-Dirac effect. One
principle used in analyzing this phenomenon is used to show that the product of the metal and slot
impedances of an antenna is equal to eta squared divided by 4. In one instance, this phenomenon
shows a series of intensity peaks at the maxima of the square of the sinc [sink] function. The integral
from zero to x of sin squared or cosine squared are important in describing one version of it. The
first zero of a first order (*) Bessel function of the first kind appears in a formula explaining how this
effect limits the angular resolution of a system; that is the Rayleigh criterion. Fraunhofer names its far-field
variant. The Huygens principle is used to explain this phenomenon for a single slit. For 10 points, name this
effect in which waves bend around an object or aperture.
ANSWER: diffraction [accept more specific answers]
In one instance of this process, the amplitude at a given angle is equal to a product of the square of
two sinc [SINK] functions. One mathematical formalism describing this process requires using the
Kirchoff integral formula to find the solution of the wave equation at a random point. A simple
instance of this phenomenon has a constant multiplier of (*) 1.22; that version of this phenomenon
produces an Airy disk and occurs through a circular aperture. A classic instance of this phenomenon has
maxima when the path length differs by multiples of the wavelength. For 10 points, name this phenomenon,
which at different distances is modeled by the Fraunhofer and Fresnel regimes, in which light bends around
an object.
ANSWER: diffraction [accept interference]
The Schaffer-Bergman form of this phenomenon is caused by light interacting with sound propagating
through a medium. In transmission electron microscopy, accelerated electrons undergo this phenomenon,
resulting in a reflection of the sample crystal's reciprocal lattice. In optics, it leads to the appearance of an
Airy disc, which determines the Rayleigh criterion for the focusing power of telescopes. Bragg's law
specifies the geometry required for this type of interaction of x-rays with a crystal lattice. A more familiar
display of this property involves a laser beam passing through a thin slit. FTP, name this wave phenomenon
that describes the interference of waves upon interaction with a barrier, taking its name from the Latin for
"to break into pieces".
ANSWER: diffraction
The Fraunhofer type requires the use of a Fresnel-Kirchoff integral. A grating of this type is used to split
light into its various wavelengths, and consists of closely placed parallel slits. Patterns of it can be used to
determine spacing between layers of atoms through an application of Bragg's law. Using the de Broglie
wavelength, occurrence of this for neutrons and electrons was one of the main arguments for quantum
mechanics. The X-ray type of this was used to determine the shape of macromolecules like the alpha helix
of proteins discovered by Linus Pauling and the double helix shape of DNA. FTP, name this wave
phenomenon exhibited by light as it curves around a thin opening, the subject of Young's double slit
experiment.
ANSWER: Diffraction (Prompt on Crystallography after X ray)
One principle important to understanding this phenomenon is used by radio engineers to find the ratio
between metal and slot impedances. Electrons passing through a nickel crystal undergo this effect, as
discovered by Davisson and Germer. Babinet showed the equivalence of two versions of this phenomenon,
and one version of it is described by a formula with a constant of 1.22. Fresnel and Fraunhofer name the
near and far-field versions of this phenomenon, which is also described in terms of wavefronts by Huygens
principle. It produces an Airy disk when occurring in a small hole. This behavior also occurs in a
double-slit setup. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which light bends as it passes through an
opening or around an object.
ANSWER: Diffraction
The powder type of this phenomenon is a technique used to analyze crystalline solids. Application of this
effect to crystal lattices and X-rays was pioneered by the father-son team of Bragg. In microscopes and
telescopes, this phenomenon prevents angular resolution beyond a certain point. Types of this phenomenon
are named for Fraunhoffer and Fresnel. Interference patterns that occur due to this phenomenon resulted
from Young's double slit experiment. A namesake grating can be used to separate light of different
wavelengths. For 10 points, name this effect in which light bends around an object.
ANSWER: diffraction [prompt on interference]
A method of determining sound speed in a liquid examines ultrasound waves causing this
phenomenon in light in an effect named for Debye and Sears. In several common cases, the intensity
of this phenomenon can be calculated with a Cornu spiral. Electrons scattered off a nickel crystal
exhibited this phenomenon in the (*) Davisson-Germer experiment. This phenomenon arises from the
interference of wavelets formed according to Huygens's principle. The near field type of this phenomenon
is named for Fresnel, while another type is named for Fraunhofer. This phenomenon produces dark fringes
when monochromatic light shines through a slit. For 10 points, name this phenomenon by which light bends
around obstacles.
ANSWER: diffraction
Some treatments of this phenomenon remove symmetry from their solutions by adding an obliquity
factor. One theory of this phenomenon computes a solution by taking the Green's function of the
Helmholtz equation, then plugging it into the Kirchhoff integral theorem. The formula "1.22 times
lambda over D" gives the angular resolution caused by this phenomenon. This phenomenon can be
modeled by viewing each point on a (*) wavefront as a source of a new spherical wave. For this
phenomenon in a crystal, two times the lattice spacing times the sine of the incident angle equals an integer
multiple of the wavelength. X-rays undergo this phenomenon in X-ray crystallography. Described by the
Rayleigh criterion, Huygens- principle, and Bragg's Law, for 10 points, name this phenomenon in which
light bends around an aperture or obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction [prompt on "interference"]
A theory of this phenomenon uses the Green's function for a unit-amplitude spherical wave
expanding about a point and the Helmholtz equation to derive the complex amplitude of the
disturbance. The intensity patterns due to this phenomenon are minimally resolvable when their
angular separation is 1.22 times lambda over capital D, which is the Rayleigh criterion. Problems
dealing with this phenomenon in the far-field and near-field limit can be solved by assuming that every
point on a wave-front is a source of secondary spherical wavelets, which is part of the Huygens-Fresnel
principle. Interference and this phenomenon cause minima and maxima to appear in Young's double slit
experiment. For 10 points, name this optical phenomenon in which light bends around an object.
ANSWER: diffraction [prompt on interference]
When this process occurs in a circular region, an Airy disk can form. The far-field variety of this
process results in only a change in image size and occurs when aperture radius squared over screen
distance over wavelength is much less than one. The Fraunhofer form of this process occurs at very
low Fresnel numbers. The [*] Huygens principle describes this phenomenon by treating every point of an
advancing wave front as a new wave source. When using this phenomenon's namesake grating, interference
patterns can be found with the equation d sin theta equals n lambda. For 10 points, name this bending of
light around an obstacle or its spreading out through an opening.
ANSWER: diffraction
One form of this phenomenon can be modeled by the Cornu Spiral, a parametric plot of two
integrals of arc length. The Rayleigh Criterion limits the resolution of images produced by this
phenomenon when light goes through a circular (*) aperture. Airy Disks and Newton's Rings are
patterns formed by light undergoing this phenomenon, which has near-field and far-field types named for,
respectively, Fresnel (fruh-NELL) and Fraunhofer (FRAUN-hoff-er). For 10 points, name this phenomenon
in which light bends upon encountering a small obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction
Superoscillation can circumvent one effect of this process, and the Cornu spiral can aid the computation of
this effect. To find the angle resolution in this effect, one uses a formulation involving a constant of 1.22
and the wavelength over the diameter. The Fraunhofer type of this effect is contrasted with the Fresnel type.
The Rayleigh Criterion is used to find the effect of this process in the case of a round aperture. Two effects
of this phenomenon are (*) Newton's rings and Airy discs. For ten points, name this phenomenon in which
light bends around an object or through a small opening.
ANSWER: diffraction
The Kirchhoff [KEER-kawff] equation can be approximated by the Fraunhofer type of this
phenomenon, which was observed in Young's double slit experiment. When the observer is close to
the obstructing surface, its Fresnel type occurs. When it manifests as (*) scattering, Bragg's law
describes this phenomenon in crystals. Huygens- [HOY-ginz-] principle describes every point on a wave
front as a source of, for 10 points, what phenomenon of waves bending around obstacles?
ANSWER: diffraction (accept word forms)
This process can produce a Talbot carpet with reconstructions at fractional multiples of the Talbot length.
This process produces the same results for conjugate arrangements, as stated by Babinet's principle. In
some situations the effects of this process can be approximated using a sum of Fresnel zones. Structures
formed by this process include the Arago or Poisson spot and the Airy disk. The wave nature of electrons
and light was established by observing this phenomenon in the Davisson-Germer and Young double-slit
experiments, respectively. For 10 points, name this bending of wavefronts as they pass near an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction
This phenomenon happens as a result of sound waves inducing density fluctuations in water in the
Debye-Sears effect, while when involving x-rays and a crystal lattice this phenomenon is named for
Bragg, and through a circular aperture it leads to a pattern named for Airy. Its far-field type is
named for (*) Fraunhofer, while its near-field type involves integrals named for Fresnel. This phenomenon
may be explained by the principle that every point on a wavefront is its own source, which is named for
Huygens. For 10 points, name this optical phenomenon where a wave encounters an obstacle and bends
around it.
ANSWER: diffraction
To determine whether or not an image has the limitation named after this phenomenon, you use the
Rayleigh criterion. That criterion is used when this creates Airy's disc. One type of this phenomenon can be
evaluated using a Cornu spiral, but when an image caused by this is far from the object causing it, that spiral
cannot be used with the Fraunhofer [fraun-HOE-fur] type. This is used to study atomic spectra using its
namesake grating. Name this wave phenomenon associated with interference patterns that involves curving
around an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction (accept other word forms, do not accept "refraction")
This phenomenon is used in a technique that uses a phosphor screen and a CCD camera in the
specimen chamber of a scanning electron microscope, which images the kikuchi bands of its
"backscatter" form. In one form of this phenomenon, crystal size is proportional to shape factor over
line broadening. With X-rays, it is described by the Scherrer equation and Bragg's law. If the coherence
length is smaller than another measure, then two single-slit patterns of this phenomenon overlaid is the same
as the double-slit pattern, unlike the interference found by Young. For 10 points, name this optical event in
which light propagates past an obstacle, resulting in complex patterns.
ANSWER: diffraction [accept word forms]
When a telescope is limited by this effect, its angular resolution is equal to one point two two times the
wavelength of light over the aperture. When this effect is caused by a crystal it is known as the Bragg form
of this effect. This effect's namesake grating (GREAT-ing) equation states that d times the sin (SIGN) of
the maximum angle equals m times wavelength. This effect caused interference in Young's double slit
experiment. For 10 points, name this apparent bending of a wave as it passes through a small opening.
ANSWER: diffraction
The magnitude of one type of this phenomenon is governed by a namesake v-parameter given by the
Cornu Spiral, and its Fraunhofer type occurs for Fresnel number less than one. Bragg's law explains how
x-rays experience it when meeting crystals, and the Davisson-Germer experiment showed that electrons
experience it. It can be explained by Huygens - Principle, and constructive interference illustrated that it
happens to light in Young's double-slit experiment, showing its wave nature. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a wave bends around an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction [accept Fresnel diffraction before "Fraunhofer"]
Clifford Shull used the neutron type of this concept to explore the structure of ice, and one model of this
concept uses Rayleigh-Sommerfeld integrals. Used to explain an opal's play-of-color, the Laue (LOUW-uh)
patterns produced by this effect on X-rays helped determine the shape of DNA. An Airy disk results when
this principle occurs for a circular aperture, and Fresnel numbers less than one are indicative of its
Fraunhofer (FROUN-hoh-fer) type. Generating interference patterns in Young's double-slit experiment,
name this principle, the bending or spreading of waves around an obstacle.
ANSWER: diffraction [accept word forms]
Ernst Ising solved his own model of ferromagnetism for cases in which this measure was one, but Lars
Onsager solved it for cases in which this measure is two. Minkowski space has a measure of four for this
property. String theory and M-theory propose that several of them have "curled up" at a subatomic level. In
relativity, the fourth one of them is time. For 10 points, name this minimum number of coordinates needed
to describe each point within a space, which is three for a cube and two for a square.
ANSWER: dimensions
The Kaluza-Klein theory attempted to unify gravitation with electromagnetism by using five of these, while
in brane theory the term p-brane denotes a brane with p spatial ones of these. Fractional numbers of these,
including the Renyi and Hausdorff varieties, are possible in fractal geometry. In some string theories,
compact ones take the form of Calabi-Yau manifolds, while M-theory calls for the existence of 11 of them.
Special relativity adds time as the fourth one of these. For 10 points, name these physical concepts, the
coordinates needed to uniquely identify a location, three of which exist in classical physics.
ANSWER: dimensions
One type of this device relies on an overlap between the valence and conduction bands to keep the
Fermi level constant and operates by inducing a current across a narrow depletion region. Four of these
elements are connected in a bridge to produce a full-wave rectifier. Voltage regulators are often designed
using a specific type of this circuit element in which the current is independent of the applied voltage once
the breakdown voltage is exceeded. The varactor type of these circuit elements is used to implement a
variable capacitance. Seemingly negative resistance is exhibited by a variety of these devices named for
Esaki; simpler ones consist of single PN junctions. For 10 points, identify these circuit elements which also
exist in Schottky and Zener varieties and that typically pass current in only one direction.
ANSWER: diodes
When these devices exploit their voltage-dependent variable capacitance they are known as
varactors. Barring the creation of local hot spots, a non-destructive avalanche current is produced by
electron-hole pair propagation when the electric field within the (*) depletion region of these devices
reaches a critical value. Majority carriers exist in an energy state greater than the Fermi energy in the
Schottky barrier variety and those that operate in reverse breakdown are named after Zener. For 10 points-
name these devices that allow current to pass in only one direction.
ANSWER: diodes
A load resistor and capacitor filter in parallel with a "bridge" of these devices can smooth
output and has a characteristic voltage "ripple". That "bridge" contains four of these devices,
constituting a full-wave rectifier that converts an AC input to DC. The current of an ideal one is
equal to the saturation current times quantity exponential of voltage over thermal voltage, all
minus one, an equation sometimes named for William Shockley. A simple model of these
devices assumes they have a constant voltage drop. Examples of these devices that operate above
the breakdown voltage include the avalanche type and one named for Clarence Zener. They are
commonly constructed of a p-n junction. For 10 points, identify these devices operated in a
"forward" or "reverse" direction, the latter of which does not allow current to flow.
ANSWER: diodes
One type of these is connected in reverse bias and conducts current above a certain breakdown point into
the ground. In an ideal one of these, the current in terms of the voltage across them can be found using the
Shockley equation. Besides the avalanche and Zener types, another kind can be used as capacitors whose
capacitance depends on voltage, which are called varactors. For 10 points, name these two-electrode
devices which traditionally only admit current in one direction, best known for a light-emitting variety.
ANSWER: diode
One type of these exhibit a peculiar behavior which can be described by the Ridley-Watkins-Hilsum
two-valley model; that type shows a negative differential resistance profile for fields higher than 3
KV per centimeter. Another type, which make use of quantum tunnelling, are named for Esaki, and
they can be employed to rectify AC current into DC current. The ideal behaviour of these is governed by the
Shockley equation, and another type employs the avalanche breakdown effect named for Zener. Yet another
one of these is formed by the contact of the semiconductor, and they are symbolized by a forward triangle
touching a vertical bar. For 10 points, identify these circuit elements which only allow current to pass in one
direction.
ANSWER: diode
The current for these devices can be found as the saturation current times the quantity exponential of
voltage over thermal voltage minus one, which is an equation named for William Shockley. Analysis
of these devices typically uses the depletion approximation. The operating point of these devices can
be graphically determined by overlaying a load line on their I-V characteristic, which features only
one curve. A bridge of these devices can be used to implement a full-wave rectifier. A type of these devices
intended to work beyond the breakdown voltage is named for Clarence Zener and they are typically
operated in either reverse-bias or forward-bias mode. For 10 points, identify these circuit devices that
maintain a constant voltage drop, ideally 0.7 volts, when its threshold voltage is exceeded.
ANSWER: diodes [or pn junctions; or Zener diodes]
Maintaining a constant voltage above the breakdown voltage is the function of the "zener" type of this
component. This circuit element is depicted as an encircled solid triangle with a line perpendicularly
intersecting the wire at one vertex. A full-wave rectifier circuit uses an even number of these devices.
Unlike
transistors, they consist of a p-type semiconductor joined to an n-type semiconductor. For 10 points, name
these circuit elements that allow current to flow in only one direction, that come in a "light emitting"
variety.
ANSWER: diode
Transferred electron devices are a form of these components that utilize negative differential resistance and
are generally named for Gunn. A law giving their current is named for transistor-inventor William
Shockley. One of these and a MOSFET is used to form a synchronous rectifier, and four of these devices
are arranged in a namesake bridge in full-wave rectifiers. If these have a large enough negative voltage
drop, they go into breakdown, though reverse-bias operation is possible in their Zener variety. For 10
points, name these devices that normally consist of a p-n junction and only allow current to pass in one
direction, and which also come in light-emitting types.
ANSWER: diodes [accept early buzz of Gunn diodes]
The Gunn type of these displays symmetric current/voltage behavior, and exhibit negative differential
resistance after the threshold voltage is reached. The current passing through them varies exponentially with
a forward bias and can be found with the Shockley equation, though that equation does not apply to
Avalanche and Zener types of these. For 10 points, identify these circuit elements which only allow current
to pass through in one direction, best known for their "light emitting" type.
ANSWER: diodes
This is the central component in a clamper circuit, which shifts a potential difference average so that it is
not zero. The first semiconductor type of this was known as a "cat's whisker" and used in early radios. The
type containing a metal-semiconductor junction can be combined with a transistor and is named for Walter
Schottky. These are a type of rectifier, sometimes classified as the ones used with low power. The avalanche
type is similar to the Zener type in that they both have a breakdown voltage beyond which backward current
occurs, and some calculators use the light-emitting type. Name these devices that ideally are supposed to
completely allow current in one direction but stop it in the opposite direction.
ANSWER: diodes [prompt on rectifier]
Some types of this device exhibit negative resistance at higher voltages. Their current varies exponentially
according to the Shockley equation, and four of them make up a bridge rectifier. One type achieves rapid
switching by replacing a p-type semiconductor with a metal contact, while another type allows for reverse
bias operation because of its reduced breakdown voltage; those are the Schottky and Zener types.
Consisting of a PN-junction, they allow current to pass in only one direction. For 10 points, name these
circuit components, one type of which is "light-emitting."
ANSWER: diodes
One equation that governs these objects involves the ideality factor, which is multiplied by the thermal
voltage. The saturation current is another term in that law, the Shockley equation. These devices typically
overheat above the breakdown voltage, although the reverse-biased "avalanche" type will not. These
devices, symbolized on circuit diagrams with a triangle and a vertical line, consist of a single P-N junction.
With low forward resistances but very high reverse resistances, for 10 points, name these circuit
components, designed to allow current to flow in only one direction, which may be "light-emitting".
ANSWER: diodes
Two opposing ones of these devices can be used to create a transorb. One type of these devices
achieves microwave-frequency operation by using quantum tunneling. The current through one of
these can be approximated as the saturation current times the exponential of the voltage divided by a
constant times the thermal voltage, according to the (*) Shockley equation. One type can be used as a
voltage-controlled capacitor, and the Zener type can safely conduct in the reverse direction when above the
breakdown voltage. Under reverse bias, the depletion region widens, stopping the current. They consist of a
p-n junction, and allow current to flow in one direction only. For 10 points, name these electronic
components, some of which are "light-emitting."
ANSWER: diode [accept more specific answers, i.e. Esaki diode, tunnel diode, avalanche diode, Zener diode, etc]
Television tuners often contain examples of these devices with variable capacitance. An early type of these
devices used thermionic emission and were packaged in vacuum tubes. The Schottky variety of these
devices has much faster switching time than the common p-n junction variety. Types of these devices
designed to operate below their breakdown voltage include avalanche and Zener. A rudimentary example of
these devices is used in cat's whisker radios, and four of these devices are now used in a full-wave rectifier.
Superior alternatives to incandescent bulbs include their light-emitting variety. For ten points, name these
types of electronic devices which pass current in one direction.
ANSWER: diodes
The earliest type of antennas invented by Hertz created one of these configurations between ends of a
wire attached at the center to a feed-driven elememnt. The power radiated by an oscillating one of
these is proportional to the fourth power of the angular frequency divided by the speed of light
cubed, and a molecule must be one of these along some axis if it is IR active. Their field intensity drops off
as the inverse cube of the distance, and van Der Waals forces occur between spontaneously created ones.
For 10 points, name this configuration of charges, which can be modeled as a positive charge separated
from a negative one.
ANSWER: Dipole
A quantity named for one of these objects can be expressed as a sum over copies of the L equals
one solid harmonic. A time-varying one of these objects emits radiative power proportional to the
fourth power of its frequency. The torque on one of them is perpendicular to an applied electric field,
and the strength of one of them is equal to a volume integral of charge density times position. This
object gives its name to the one over (*) r-squared term in a power series for electric potential, and its
electric field falls off as one over r cubed. For 10 points, name these objects whose "moments" are
measured in debyes, charge configurations consisting of two equal and opposite charges separated by a
small distance.
ANSWER: electric dipole
This term refers to an anisotropy of the CMB that is caused by the motion of the earth through
space. The power radiated by an oscillating one of these is proportional to the fourth power of the
frequency, which is a principle used in television antennas. The atomic model of a dielectric posits it
as a collection of several of these, which align and create a field opposing the external field. Their
electric field falls off as one over the third power of the (*) distance. Placing one of these in an electric
field creates a torque equal to the cross product of the field with these configurations- namesake
"moment". For 10 points, identify this configuration consisting of a positive and a negative charge bound
together.
ANSWER: dipole [prompt on "polar molecules" due to the dielectric clue]
Transitions named for these objects are subject to the selection rule that L must change by one.
The Synchrotron Radiation Source uses magnets in this configuration to generate synchrotron
radiation. This configuration, which corresponds to the l equals one spherical harmonic, is the
highest-order one unable to radiate gravitational waves. An oscillating one of these radiates power
proportional to the fourth power of (*) frequency. The electric field of these entities drops off as the third
power of the distance. The torque on one of these in an electric field is equal to the cross product of its
namesake moment and the electric field. For 10 points, name this arrangement in which one positive and
one negative charge are paired together.
ANSWER: dipole
The relative motion of the Earth with respect to the rest of the universe produces an anisotropy of
this type in the CMBR. The Laporte selection rule only applies to electronic transitions of this type.
The power of the radiation emitted by an oscillating one of these objects is proportional to the 4th
power of the oscillation frequency. Hertz invented a simple antenna described by this word. The
electric field created by one of these objects falls off with the (*) inverse-cubed power of distance. The
torque on one of these objects in an external field is given by the cross-product of a quantity characterizing
them with the field. The Coulomb-meter and the Debye are units of their namesake "moment." For 10
points, name this configuration of a positive and a negative charge separated by a short distance.
ANSWER: dipole [accept more specific answers like "electric dipole"]
The Guggenheim-Smith equation gives this quantity as proportional to the square root of the
molar orientation polarizability. The direction of this vector quantity determines the kappa
squared term in FRET. For a molecule, this quantity changes when it undergoes scissoring,
wagging, or rocking. A selection rule for a quantum harmonic oscillator is that the integral of the
operator for this quantity cannot be zero. The cross product of this quantity with electric field
equals torque, and the dot product equals negative potential energy. The ratio of this quantity to
the electric field has units volume and is called polarizability. A molecule is polar if this quantity
is nonzero. For 10 points, name this quantity, measured in Debyes, that is the charge times the
separation distance for two oppositely charged particles.
ANSWER: electric dipole moment [or transition dipole moment; do not accept "magnetic dipole moment"]
An equation named for this man predicts that electrons in free space will rapidly oscillate around a
median, called zitterbewegung. Along with Kapitsa, this man names an effect in which a particle
beam is diffracted by a standing wave of light. This man proposed the existence of objects whose
strength is a multiple of h bar c over 2 e. Those objects, whose existence he showed to imply the
quantization of (*) electric charge and magnetic charge, are magnetic monopoles. He also theorized the
existence of positrons based on his namesake relativistic wave equation for spin 1/2 particles. For 10 points,
name this English physicist, the namesake of a generalized function which is 0 everywhere except at 0, and
has integral one, his namesake delta function.
ANSWER: Paul Dirac
He summarized observed coincidences in the order of magnitude of ratios of fundamental constants,
namely, the repeated occurrence of the exponent 40, in his "large numbers hypothesis." Solutions to
his namesake equation can be expressed as spinors. A function named for this physicist, also called
the Shah function, is equal to its own Fourier transform, and is known as his (*) "comb." He
introduced a namesake delta function in a book that unified matrix mechanics and wave mechanics, and
subsequently showed that the existence of magnetic monopoles would explain charge quantization. He
names an equation that accounts for special relativity in describing spin one half particles. For 10 points,
name this physicist whose namesake "sea" predicted the existence of antimatter.
ANSWER: Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac
One of this person's major accomplishments was formally the discovery of a representation of spin groups
in terms of objects named for him that change sign under rotations through four pi, his namesake spinors.
He unified matrix and wave mechanics with the introduction of bra-ket notation, and he is the second
namesake of a function equal to one over one plus e to the state energy minus chemical potential all over
kinetic temperature that gives the expected number of fermions in a state of given energy. Naming that set
of statistics with Fermi, this is, for 10 points, what physicist, who won a Nobel prize for his study of wave
mechanics with Schrodinger.
ANSWER: Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac
One function named for this man can be used to generate an ideal sampler and thus prove the
Nyquist-Shannon theorem, and is a periodic Schwarz distribution sometimes known as an Impulse
Train. The Rarita-Schwinger equation is a generalization of an equation bearing this man's name for
particles of spin three-halves, and this namesake of a certain comb also names an equation that is a
(*) relativistic generalization of the Schrodinger equation for spin one-half particles. In addition to
prediction and description of antimatter as a negative energy state, he found that magnetic monopoles could
explain the quantization of electric charge. Sharing credit for a doubly-eponymous statistical distribution
with Enrico Fermi, FTP, name this British theoretical physicist whose namesake delta function is defined as
infinity at a point on the x-axis and zero everywhere else.
ANSWER: Paul Dirac
The Shah function consists of a set of uniformly spaced functions named for this man. That function is the
derivative of the Heaviside step function, and is frequently used for its "sifting" property. He developed a
notation whose two components can be used to denote the inner product, and he also proposed the existence
of a "sea" of negative energy eigenstates. An equation developed by this man describes the relativistic
motion of spin 1/2 particles based on 4-component wavefunctions, and is a relativistic generalization of the
Schrodinger wavefunction. That equation also suggested the existence of positrons. For 10 points, identify
this scientist who proposed the existence of antiparticles.
ANSWER: Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac
A construction named for this man is the identity of the convolution function, and a Clifford algebra
can be constructed from his namesake gamma matrices. His inference that the gravitational constant
varies inversely with time is part of his large numbers hypothesis. A pair of conjugate transposes
make up his (*) bra-ket notation, and a model of a vacuum as particles possessing negative energy is
known as his sea. He names a set of statistics describing fermions with Fermi. For 10 points, name this
physicist who names a function that is infinite at one point and zero everywhere else, his namesake delta
function.
ANSWER: Paul Dirac
To simplify the notation of this scientist's namesake equation, one uses a set of four four-by-four
gamma matrices. This scientist introduced the bra and ket notation in quantum mechanics. He is the
second namesake of a distribution function equal to one over the quantity positive one plus some
constant times the exponential of energy over k T. A function that exists only where its input is zero,
has infinite height, and has an integral one is his (*) "delta". His namesake equation is a relativistic wave
equation describing spin-one-half particles, as does that distribution of which he is the second namesake.
That distribution's first namesake also names spin-one-half particles: Enrico Fermi. For 10 points, name
this person whose namesake equation predicted the existence of antimatter.
ANSWER: Paul Dirac
This man suggested that the gravitational constant is inversely proportional to the age of the universe in his
large numbers hypothesis. Probability amplitudes are often calculated using this man's bra-ket notation.
This man's namesake equation yields solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation and is the relativistic
generalization of the Schrodinger equation. He names a system of statistics used for spin-one-half particles
with Enrico Fermi. This man also names a function that is zero at every input value except zero. For 10
points, name this English physicist who names a delta function.
ANSWER: Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac
Oskar Klein discovered that applying his equation to scattering with an electric potential did not
conserve total probability, and a "sea" named for this physicist refers to a description of the vacuum.
He took the square root of the wave operator by giving each spatial derivative, as well as the time
derivative, coefficients that he found to be (*) four-by-four matrices; those matrices define his namesake
algebra and underlie one of his most prominent contributions, a wave equation consistent with special
relativity that describes the behavior of fermions. For 10 points, name this pyhsicist who predicted the
existence of antimatter.
ANSWER: Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac
The BBC recently introduced a codec for video transmission named for this man, who noted that several
size ratios in the universe were of the same magnitude in his large numbers hypothesis. A representation of
the Clifford algebra is expressed in his eponymous 4 by 4 matrices, and he expanded on the work of Poisson
to account for second-class constraints in his eponymous brackets. His comb is a series of another function
that he names, and his eponymous sea led to the prediction of a certain particle and grew from his
relativistic version of the wave equation. For 10 points, name this man who predicted the positron and
names a unit impulse delta function.
ANSWER: Paul Dirac
Scattering from a potential of this type produces a reflection coefficient equal to the inverse of 1 plus
2 times h-bar times the energy divided by the mass times alpha squared, where alpha represents the
"strength" of the potential. That potential well always possesses a single bound state with negative
energy. When a given linear differential operator is applied to its associated Green's function, the
source term is replaced with one of these. The integral from minus infinity to infinity of some
function f of x times this (*) function of x minus c is equal to f of c according to the sifting property. For
10 points, name this distribution useful in physics for representing unit impulses, which is equal to zero
everywhere except for where its argument is zero, a "function" named for a British physicist.
ANSWER: Dirac delta function [or distribution]
Substituting this mathematical object in for the inhomogeneous term in an integrodifferential equation
yields the equation satisfied by the associated Green's function. This object is the fundamental example of
the class of abstract sequentially continuous linear functionals on non-metric vector spaces of C-infinityzero functions; such objects are known as singular distributions. Operation of convolution with a sequence
approximating this functional converges in distribution to the identity operation. Therefore, the convolution
of this object with any function f yield f of zero, a fact known as the sifting property. This distribution can
be considered the generalized derivative of the step function. For 10 points, name this mathematical object
that can be understood as a spike of unit area, zero width, and infinite height.
ANSWER: Dirac delta function [prompt on delta function]
.Majorana modified this equation by including the charge conjugate of the spin or wave function to describe
neutrinos instead of electrons, which coincidentally also have spins of 1/2. In Feynman slash notation, it can
be summarized as "minus I times delta slash plus mass in brackets times U equals zero." Applying the
correspondence principle to transform the wave function by a phase factor yields a constant phase gradient,
implying an invariant electromagnetic field, a result which became a founding principle of quantum
electrodynamics. Any solution to this equation naturally solves the Klein-Fock-Gordon equation.
Predicting the existence of antiparticles four years before Carl Anderson discovered the positron, for 10
points, name this central wave equation of quantum field theory formulated by the 1932 Lucasian Chair in
Cambridge and 1933 Nobel Prize winner in Physics.
ANSWER: Dirac equation
This relation can be derived through the use of five matrices, one of which anti-commutes with the
other four, and which together form a Clifford algebra. Applying the minimum substitution rule to
the derivatives of spinors used in this relation is done to introduce electromagnetic interactions and
the objects described by this equation are equivalently described by representations of the (*) SU(2)
group. Solving this equation yields traveling waves with four possible values of the frequency, with the
negative solutions being the charge-conjugate partners of the positive-frequency ones. Also yielding a
natural derivation of spin, for ten points, identify this analogue of the Klein-Gordon equation, a relativistic
equation for spin-1/2 particles that predicts the existence of antimatter named for a British physicist.
ANSWER: Dirac equation
One parameter related to this effect is equal to negative lambda over c times the second derivative of n with
respect to lambda. Temporal optical solitons are able to propagate because this effect is balanced by the
non-linear Kerr effect, and when a pulse travels through a medium that induces an anomalous version of this
behavior, it becomes negatively chirped. The Abbe number measures the extent of this phenomenon in
transparent materials, which leads to chromatic aberration, and its extent can be determined by the
Sellmeier equation. Caused by a variance in the refractive index for difference wavelenghts of light, for 10
points, name this phenomenon in which light divides into different colors when passed through a medium.
ANSWER: dispersion
A 1991 Tokyo Institute of Technology study used it to probe Langmuir-Blodgett films by placing electrodes
on either side of the film. Used with the curl of the Heaviside form of its namesake's equations to derive the
electromagnetic wave equation, its postulation suggested that the magnetic field was not merely a product of
moving electric charge, and it is equal to the permittivity of free space times the time derivative of the
electric field. For 10 points, name this value created as a correction to Ampere's circuit law by James Clerk
Maxwell.
ANSWER: (Maxwell) displacement current [accept electric displacement]
This quantity is equal to 10 to the power quantity apparent magnitude minus absolute magnitude
plus 5, all over 5, and the difference between the apparent and absolute magnitude is often called the
modulus of this quantity. Baryon acoustic oscillations provide a standard for measuring this
quantity. Two versions of this quantity, one of which can change over time and the other which is
constant, are related by the (*) scale factor; those are the co-moving and proper versions of it. Leavitt's
fixed period-luminosity relationship for Cepheid variables allows their use for measuring this quantity.
Measures of this quantity are calibrated using stellar parallax. The radial velocity is equal to this value times
the Hubble parameter according to Hubble's law, which is used to relate it to redshift. For 10 points, name
this parameter which is measured in parsecs and light-years.
ANSWER: distance [accept things like "how far away things are" or equivalents]
One method for determining this is named for Faber and Jackson and suggests that luminosity is roughly
proportional to sigma to the fourth. An analogous operation on spiral galaxies calculates it by determining
the velocity width, called the Tully-Fisher relation. Alternatively, it may be found by looking at nearby type
Ia supernovae or at the object's recession velocity. Its namesake "modulus" relates the difference between
the absolute and apparent magnitudes to this quantity. FTP, identify this quantity that can be measured in
astronomical units.
ANSWER: distance (accept modifiers like interstellar, etc.)
Malmquist's namesake bias seeks to explain the selection of luminous objects when this quantity
is large. De Vaucouleurs- law states that the surface brightness of an elliptical galaxy is related to the
quartic root of this quantity. This quantity can be computed for an object of known period via the
period-luminosity relationship developed by Henrietta Swan Leavitt. Its namesake (*) modulus is
calculated from the difference of the apparent and absolute known brightness of a star. Standard candles are
objects of known brightness that can be used to calculate this quantity. Both absolute and apparent visual
magnitudes normalize this quantity, which can be measured in parsecs. For 10 points, name this
astronomical quantity that can be measured in light years.
ANSWER: distance [accept reasonable equivalents, i.e. how far away something is]
One method for measuring this quantity involves plotting the apparent magnitude against
temperature of a cluster's main sequence stars and comparing to a standard H-R diagram. Another
method uses a power law between the rotational speed of a (*) spiral galaxy and its luminosity, known
as the Tully-Fisher relation. The difference between apparent and absolute magnitude is this quantity's
namesake modulus. It can be found by measuring the difference in position of stars due to the motion of the
Earth, known as parallax. It is measured with the help of RR Lyrae variables, type Ia supernovae, Cepheid
variables, and other standard candles. For 10 points, parsecs are unit of measurement for what quantity,
whose value for the Earth-Sun system is 1 astronomical unit?
ANSWER: distance [or absolute magnitude; do not accept or prompt on "magnitude" alone]
The Ives-Stilwell experiment explored the possibilities of its transverse variety, which requires the
introduction of the Lorentz factor. Its cosmological variety results from the predictions of Hubble's Law,
and its relativistic variety comes with a coefficient of the square root of the quantity one minus beta over
one plus beta, but at non-relativistic speeds its effects are proportional to radial velocity. For 10 points, give
this term referring to the distortion of the observed frequency of waves, particularly but not necessarily
light, due to velocity.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [prompt on redshift]
This phenomenon is used to create a so-called "optical molasses" when atoms absorb photons from
an oncoming laser. That application of it is used to create Bose-Einstein condensates by its namesake
"cooling." Relativistically, this effect shows that a certain quantity changes by a factor of the square
root of one plus beta over one minus beta. General relativity was confirmed by (*) Pound and Rebka's
experiment demonstrating it, which can result in either blueshifts or redshifts. It occurs when the velocity of
the source is not the same as the velocity of the observer. For ten points, name this effect which causes car
sirens to increase in pitch.
ANSWER: Doppler effect (or Doppler shift; or Doppler cooling before mention)
Collisions reduce the magnitude of one result caused by this phenomenon in the Dicke Effect.
Observations of small changes in this phenomenon are likely evidence of the existence of an exoplanet. A
star's temperature can be estimated thanks to this effect's widening of spectral lines. For light, this
phenomenon causes a fractional change equal to the difference in two velocities divided by c. Depending on
which direction a star is moving, this effect can cause either redshift or blueshift. For 10 points, identify this
phenomenon in which an observer's motion relative to the source of a wave causes shifts in its perceived
frequency, which is used in a certain type of weather radar.
ANSWER: Doppler effect/shift
One type of this phenomenon is specific to special relativity and is the most direct form of time
dilation. That type of this phenomenon was separated from the longitudinal type in the Ives-Stilwell
experiment. Edwin Hubble used it to determine that the universe was expanding. This phenomenon
can be used in astronomy to calculate the speed of receding galaxies by observing the (*) redshift of
spectral lines. A common example of it is the change in pitch of the siren of a passing ambulance. For 10
points, identify this effect in which the frequency of a wave is changed when an observer is moving relative
to its source.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift]
The Ives-Stillwell experiment saw the first detection of its transverse type. In atomic physics it can describe
the broadening of spectral lines and it can be used with spectral lines to estimate the temperature of distant
stars. It was first discussed in the treatise "On the coloured light of the binary stars and some other stars of
the heavens" and was tested in one form by Buys Ballot. Red shift can be described using the relativistic
form of this effect, which is typically employed to determine the speed of a submarine using sonar
techniques. FTP, identify this effect that describes the change in frequency of a wave as it moves relative to
an observer, typically observed in sound.
ANSWER: Doppler effect (prompt on red shift before it is mentioned)
This effect's transverse form was detected by the Ives-Stillwell experiment, and Hubble used this effect to
prove the expansion of the universe. This effect is used in astronomy to measure the speed of moving
galaxies because the light they produce may blue shift or red shift, which are both examples of this effect.
For 10 points, name this effect that explains the change in the frequency of waves as they move by an
observer, typically demonstrated by a moving train.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
The E/A ratio of the heart is determined with a form of echocardiography that uses this effect with
ultrasound. Gamma rays were sent from a rotating disk in the Mossbauer rotor experiments to confirm this
phenomenon, also discovered by Hippolyte Fizeau. Another experiment used canal rays to confirm time
dilation and study this effect's transverse form, and was conducted by Ives and Stilwell. Its most
common formulation relates emitted and observer frequencies, and general relativity predicts that
redshifts are caused by this effect. For ten points, name this phenomenon in which a moving source
causes a perceived change in the frequency of a wave.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
The inverse of this effect can be demonstrated using a photonic crystal and was demonstrated by
Seddon and Bearpeak. One form of this effect can be described by an equation which includes a term
equal to the square root of the quantity one plus v over c, all over the square root of the quantity one
minus v over c. A canal ray tube was used in finding its transverse form in the Ives-Stilwell
experiment, and it can be applied to explain (*) redshift and find the distance of a galaxy. For 10 points
identify this effect, the perceived change in the frequency of a wave for an observer in motion,
demonstrated by a change in the pitch of a passing siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift]
This effect can cause broadening in the spectral lines of distant stars. It occurs because consecutive wave
peaks are emitted from different locations, and so seem to bunch up or spread out. Radar using this effect is
used in speed guns and meteorology. Depending on the direction of motion, it can give rise to a blue-shift
or a red-shift. For 10 points, name this perceived change in the frequency of waves emitted by a moving
source, exemplified by the changing pitch of a moving siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
The cooling named for this effect is a type of laser cooling that impacts particles within a certain
range of speeds. A profile named for this effect is used to find the temperature of a gas based on the
way that this effect broadens spectral lines. The transverse type of this effect is explained by the
time dilation of special relativity and was confirmed by the Ives-Stilwell experiment. Astronomical
measures of this effect led to the development of Hubble's Law and the belief that the universe
is expanding. Name this change of frequencies such as redshifts and blueshifts caused by relative
velocities between a source and observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [accept Doppler shift or equivalents, prompt on "redshift" or "blueshift"]
SOHO's SUMMER instrument uses this phenomenon to detect coronal loop oscillations. One version of
this phenomena happens in the space like limit of the wave four vector and that version of this effect
depends on the value gamma times quantity one plus beta cosine theta. The occurrence of this effect when
the line between two objects is at an angle to the relative velocity vector is known as its transverse form.
This effect is described by the formula v plus or minus v not over v plus or minus v s times f equals f prime.
This effect is used in some forms of RADAR for weather prediction. For 10 points, name this change in
frequency of a wave as the source or observer moves.
ANSWER: doppler effect [or doppler shift; or relativistic doppler effect; or transverse doppler effect]
Hippolyte Fizeau discovered this effect independently from its namesake in 1848. In spectral lines, this
effect causes a namesake "broadening." In astronomy, it can be used to calculate radial velocities of
neighboring galaxies. When two astronomical objects are moving away from each other, this effect
produces red shift. Its applications include sonar and radar. For 10 points, name this effect in which the
apparent frequency of a wave changes with the relative velocity of the observer to the source.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift; do not accept "red shift" or "blue shift"]
The relativistic form of this effect was investigated using a type of Mossbauer spectroscopy by Pound and
Rebka. Although it is not time dilation, this effect was tested in the Mossbauer rotor and Ives-Stilwell
experiment. The transverse form of this effect involves the redshift or blueshift at the point of closest
approach between a moving object and an observer. In the classical form of this effect, the velocity of the
wave is divided by the sum of that velocity and the velocity of the source. For 10 points, name this effect in
which the frequency of waves from a moving source changes, exemplified by an ambulance siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift; accept gravitational redshift before mention]
An echocardiogram uses this phenomenon to determine the velocity of blood, and the Mossbauer rotor
experiments measured one form of this phenomenon through the emission of gamma rays. One experiment
used canal ray tubes to measure the transverse form of this phenomenon, and Lorentz transformations are
used when calculating this effect's relativistic form. The altering of spectral lines as a result of this effect
causes blueshift and redshift, which are used to measure the radial velocities of galaxies. For 10 points,
name this effect named for an Austrian physicist, the perceived change in frequency of a wave relative to its
observer, which alters the pitch of a siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift]
This effect was confirmed in an experiment performed by Buys Ballot, and a relativistic form of this effect
was used in the Ives-Stilwell experiment. Another experiment using this effect to study light waves was
done by Hippolyte Fizeau. A change in the wavelength of light moving away from a viewer is called red
shift, or the "relativist" form of this effect. For 10 points, identify this effect, a change in the frequency of a
wave for a moving object, which accounts for a pitch change in a moving siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
The Dicke effect diminishes the broadening of spectral lines owing to this effect. The form of this
effect that occurs at the point of closest approach is called "transverse"; that effect was employed in
a confirmation of a certain relationship conducted by Ives and Stillwell and is one of the novel
predictions of (*) special relativity. One form of this effect has a namesake factor equal to the square root
of quantity one plus beta over one minus beta. This effect is summarized by a factor of velocity plus
receiver velocity over velocity plus source velocity. For 10 points, name this effect, wherein the frequency
of a wave is changed by the relative motion of an observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
A version of spectroscopy that is free of one form of this effect uses a standing wave to give radiation to a
moving atom and is named for its two-photon transition. Due to this effect, atoms observe laser resonance
leading to the phenomenon of optical molasses at its namesake cooling limit. Mossbauer spectroscopy uses
this effect to modulate the energy of the incident gamma rays. An experiment that used a canal ray tube and
a mirror to view light emissions was used to detect the transverse form of this effect, while its relativistic
form involves changes equal to the square root of one plus beta over one minus beta. For 10 points, name
this shift in the wavelength from a moving source that can be heard by an observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift]
The velocity width of a galaxy in the Tully-Fisher relation is measured by the shift in spectral lines
and by this effect, and a Lorentz offset in the relativistic form of this effect was observed in the
Ives-Stilwell Experiment. This effect is used in echocardiography to find the (*) velocity of blood. The
velocity of a wave is divided by the velocity of the wave plus the velocity of the source for stationary
observers in the classical form of this effect, which is why an ambulance siren's pitch is higher as it
approaches. For 10 points, name this effect that explains why frequencies from an approaching object
increase.
ANSWER: Doppler Effect
In an application of this phenomenon, cesium atoms can be slowed down in atomic clocks because the
atoms absorb photons, recoil, and lose momentum. Steven Chu won a Nobel Prize for investigating the
"cooling" mechanism of this effect. A relativistic factor for this effect equals the square root of one plus
beta over one minus beta. It was used to prove general relativity in the Pound-Rebka experiment. This effect
includes a term for the source velocity and the observer's velocity. For 10 points, name this effect which
causes a shift in observed frequencies for moving objects, which is why ambulance sirens change pitch.
ANSWER: Doppler Effect
A canal ray tube was used in the Ives-Stilwell experiment to find the transverse form of this effect,
and the relativistic form of it holds in a vacuum. This effect can be quantified by dividing the [*]
velocity of a wave plus the speed of the observer by the velocity of a wave plus the speed of the source, and
multiplying by the frequency. This effect, used to measure the distance to galaxies, is the cause of red shift.
For 10 points, identify this effect, the perceived change in frequency of a wave by a moving observer,
responsible for the fluctuations in the pitch of a passing siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
Observations of the binary system SS 433 helped verify one form of this effect, which was also
studied with a canal ray tube in the Ives-Stilwell Experiment. This effect is described by an equation
involving the frequency, relative velocity, and wave velocity, and it causes (*) redshift and blueshift in
distant stars. For 10 points, name this effect, in which a wave's frequency is changed when the source and
observer are moving relative to each other.
ANSWER: Doppler Effect [or Transverse Doppler Effect; or relativistic Doppler Effect; prompt on "redshift" or "blueshift" before mentioned]
In spectroscopy, thermal motion of particles causes line broadening via this effect. Within an
optical trap, this effect can be used to cool atoms; that setup is used to create Bose-Einstein
condensates. At relativistic speeds, this effect's namesake factor is the Lorenz gamma times the
quantity one minus v divided by the speed of light. Special relativity predicts a transverse version of
it. At lower speeds, the wave (*) velocity is added or subtracted from the receiver or source speed in the
numerator and denominator, respectively, of the factor multiplying the frequency. For 10 points, identify
this effect in which the relative motion of the emitter and observer causes a shift in the observed frequency
of a wave.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
This phenomenon's transverse variety was exploited in the first direct quantitative test of the time dilation
factor in the Ives-Stilwell experiment. The equation governing this phenomenon expresses radiation
frequency as the product of an initial frequency and a ratio of two velocities and fails at supersonic speeds.
This effect causes an increase in frequency and an increase in wavelength when either blue shift or red shift
occurs. For 10 points, name this effect, the perceived change in frequency of a wave as it moves toward or
away from an observer, an example of which is the change in pitch of the sound of a siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
This effect provides the cooling limit for low-density gases, such as rubidium-85, cooled with lasers in a
technique named for it. A result of this effect is diminished by two lasers with the same frequency used to
induce stimulated emission, a technique known as saturated absorption spectroscopy. An astronomer can
calculate the radial velocity of stars by measuring how this effect blue-shifts or red-shifts their spectra. For
10 points, name this effect in which the apparent frequency of waves is affected by the relative motion of
the source and the observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift; prompt on redshift or blueshift before read]
This effect alters Breit-Wigner resonance at high temperatures, and the random motion of the atoms in a gas
leads to this effect's namesake broadening of spectral lines. Accelerated excited hydrogen ions were used in
the Ives-Stillwell experiment to measure the second order, or transverse, type of it. In astronomy, an
application of the relativistic form of this effect is the redshift observed from distant galaxies. FTP name
this effect that results in the frequency of a wave of light or sound appearing to be higher if the source is
moving toward the observer and lower if the source is moving away.
ANSWER: Doppler effect or shift
Binary pulsars display a quadratic form of this phenomenon known as the Shklovskii effect. A form of this
phenomenon predicted by special relativity was measured using canal ray tubes in the Ives-Stillwell
experiment, and the Lorentz transformation is used to derive its relativistic form. It can be employed with
the Faber-Jackson relation or the Tully-Fisher relation to estimate the distance to a galaxy using the redshift
or blueshift produced by this effect. This effect results in a shift in frequency between a source and an
observer moving relative to that source. For 10 points, name this effect exemplified by the change in pitch
when a siren passes by.
ANSWER: Doppler Effect
This is used to interpret the phase shift when measuring blood flow during echocardiography [eh-koh-kardee-AHgruh-fee]. The relativistic version of this effect is calculated by multiplying by the square root of a
ratio that includes both one plus beta [BAYT-ah] and one minus beta, where beta is a ratio of speeds. An
example of this, used to calculate the speeds of distant objects in the universe, is the red shift. Name this
effect caused by the motion of a source or observer of wave phenomena such as light or sound that leads to
a change in frequency.
ANSWER: Doppler Effect or Shift (prompt on "red shift")
This phenomenon is exploited in substances with a closed optical loop, such as rubidium-85, to facilitate
laser-cooling into Bose-Einstein condensate. Its transverse and relativistic forms occur due to time dilation
when an object approaches the speed of light. For a laterally-moving object, the magnitude of this effect is
proportional to the cosine of the angle between it and its viewer. Usually given as a proportion dependent
on observer and source velocity, it is the cause of blueshift and redshift. For 10 points, name this effect in
which a wave's frequency changes as it moves relative to the observer, often used in weather radar and
perceived in passing ambulance sirens.
ANSWER: Doppler-Fizeau effect [accept Doppler shift]
One version of this effect formed the basis for the Ives-Stillwell experiment; that version was predicted
by special relativity and is the transverse form. This effect is responsible for blueshift and redshift, which is
an increase and decrease, respectively, in the frequency of light depending on whether the source is moving
away from, or towards, an observer, respectively. For 10 points, name this effect that causes the frequency
of a siren to increase as it approaches an observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or relativistic Doppler effect; accept shift in place of effect]
Light emitted from a rotating source undergoes a differential type of this process, and a Boltzmanndistributed group of atoms will result in its namesake broadening of spectral lines. Hubble developed his
concept of an expanding universe based on this phenomenon, which is responsible for the red shifting of
visible light from galaxies moving away from the Earth. In general cases, it leads to higher frequency waves
for approaching objects and lower frequencies for receding objects. For 10 points, name this effect that
accounts for the drop in pitch from a passing siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
Non-invasive measurement of blood flow is possible using an ultrasound and a laser via the
photoacoustic version of this effect, while another form of this effect was detected using a Dempstertype canal ray tube and a photographic plate. Binary pulsars display a quadratic form of it known as
the Shklovskii effect, and in addition to the Ives-Stillwell experiment's detection of the transverse form
of this effect, this effect is the principle behind Chu, Cohen-Tannoudji, and Philips laser-cooling apparatus.
The relativistic version of this effect has a coefficient of proportionality equal to the square root of one
minus beta divided by one plus beta, while the classical version is simply described in terms of the
velocities of the source and observer. For 10 points, name this effect in which the percieved wavelength of a
wave changes with motion.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
The classical variety of this effect involves a ratio calculated by dividing wave velocity by source velocity
plus wave velocity. This effect is utilized in radar guns to measure the speeds of cars and baseballs, and it
explains the redshift in the light emitted by receding galaxies. For 10 points, name this effect in which the
frequency of a wave changes when an observer is moving relative to the wave, exemplified by the change in
pitch of a moving siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift]
The transverse type of this effect was used in the Ives-Sitwell experiment and is a relativistic
phenomenon attributable to time dilation. Its classical form is responsible for its namesake
broadening in spectral lines, and involves multiplication by a factor of v over v plus v sub s, where v
is absolute velocity and v sub s is the relative speed of the (*) source. Applied to light to explain the
redshift of distant galaxies, for 10 points, name this effect in which the observed frequency of a wave is
shifted by relative motion between the source and observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [accept Doppler shift; do not accept "redshift" or "blueshift"]
The equation describing the relativistic form of this effect includes a factor equal to the square
root of quantity one minus v over c, all over the square root of one plus v over c. Applications of this
effect include echocardiography (ECK-oh-car-dee-AW-gruh-fee), in which it measures blood flow,
and (*) radar, which uses it to calculate the speed of an incoming or outgoing object. For 10 points, name
this effect in which the frequency of a sound increases as a sound source moves toward an observer, which
is commonly exemplified by ambulance sirens.
ANSWER: Doppler-Fizeau Effect
This phenomenon causes a quadratic term to appear in pulsar periods in the Shklovskii effect. Three
unevenly spaced wavelengths were produced by using concave mirror to ignore one of its forms,
confirming another form of this phenomenon caused by time dilation in the Ives-Stilwell experiment.
Photons emitted from particles in thermal motion undergo spectral (*) broadening due to this effect. It
was independently confirmed by Fizeau and Buys Ballot. As the spectral lines of distant stars have lower
frequency than that of hydrogen, this effect can be used to show that the universe is expanding. For 10
points, redshift is a manifestation of what effect that causes the observed pitch of a siren to decrease as an
ambulance passes by?
ANSWER: Doppler effect [accept transverse Doppler effect; prompt on redshift or blueshift]
An experiment verifying one form of this phenomenon involved measuring the frequencies of gamma rays
being produced by a spinning centrifuge. Another experiment testing this phenomenon involved looking for
longer wavelengths on a spectrograph because of a relativistic term. Those experiments, verifying the
transverse and relativistic forms of this effect, were performed by Kundig and by Ives and Stillwell.
Astronomical objects may appear red or blue because of this effect. For 10 points, name this effect in which
the motion of a wave-emitting source relative to an observer causes an apparent change in the wave's
frequency.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift; prompt on red shift or blue shift after "may appear"]
Relativistic effects cause a lateral adjustment in this phenomenon in its "transverse" type, which was
confirmed experimentally by Ives and Stilwell. The classical formula describing this effect contains terms
that represent the source and receiver velocities. This effect causes stellar objects to appear shifted towards
the red or blue ends of the spectrum. For 10 points, name this effect in which waves coming from an object
moving relative to an observer appear to change frequency, which is employed in weather radar.
ANSWER: Doppler effect
The proximity fuse, developed during World War II, applies this principle to detonate automatically
when the target is close enough. Since light waves do not travel through a medium, they require the
relativistic form of this, which takes into account time dilation. The classical form was tested and
confirmed for sound (*) waves in 1845 by Dutch scientist C.H.D. Buys Ballot. For electromagnetic
waves, it results in redshift. It relates the transmitted and observed frequencies of a wave in terms of its
velocity and the velocity of its source. FTP, name this physical phenomenon that causes the pitch of the
siren on a passing police car to change relative to a stationary observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect or shift
In a gas with a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, this effect transforms a sharp line into a Gaussian
line profile. This effect is used to scan through frequencies to find resonances in gamma ray
absorption in Mossbauer spectroscopy. A Galilean transformation of the phase velocity gives the
equation for the classical version of this effect, while its (*) transverse form occurs due to relativistic
time dilation. When the sine of the Mach angle is less than one, this effect causes wave compression in front
of a wave source. Wavelength shifts caused by this effect can be red or blue based on the direction of
motion
of a source of light. For 10 points, name this effect that changes the frequencies of receding and advancing
wave sources.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift]
A kernel named for this behavior is used in the standard integral to create thermally averaged crosssections. The non-classical form of this phenomenon is used by the Ives-Stilwell experiment and is known
as the transverse form, while absorption resonances and spectral lines are given finite width due to this
effect's namesake broadening. The magnitude of the classic version of this effect is determined by the factor
of v over quantity v plus or minus v s, where v s is the propagation speed and v is the observer-frame
normal source speed. For 10 points, name this effect in which the frequency of waves is altered when the
source is moving relative to the observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift]
Rician fading, a stochastic process describing self-cancellation of radio waves, is partially caused by this
phenomenon, a form of which was used to confirm time dilation by the Ives-Stillwell experiment. In a
similar situation to that transverse form of this effect, a stationary observer experiences an event
proportional to the square root of one plus beta over one minus beta, times the original wavelength in its
relativistic version. For 10 points, name this effect, the shift in frequency of a wave for a moving source or
observer, exemplified by ambulance sirens and the radar used to determine weather patterns.
ANSWER: Doppler effect or shift [accept transverse Doppler effect before "transverse"]
A transverse quadratic version of it, known as the Shklovskii effect, is seen in pulsars. It can be used in
conjunction with the Faber-Jackson relation or the Tully-Fisher relation to estimate the distance to a galaxy.
The transverse type of this effect was observed using a canal ray tube in the Ives-Stilwell experiment. Its
classical formulation relates the velocity of the source, and the emitted and perceived frequencies. It is used
in astronomy to measure the radial velocity of stars or galaxies, because it causes electromagnetic waves to
exhibit blueshift or redshift. For 10 points, name this effect responsible for the perceived change in pitch of
a moving ambulance's siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect or shift
The Shklovskii effect is a quadratic variant of this, and it produces a Gaussian spectral line profile through
thermal broadening. The Ives-Stilwell experiment showed that the relativistic formula for this effect was
correct, rather than the classical formula. Hasselkamp, Mondry, and Scharmann's 1979 experiment was the
first to directly test the transverse version of this effect, which classical predictions say should not exist.
First analyzed by Buys Ballot in the realm of the pitch of sound, FTP name this effect whose strength
depends on the relative velocity between source and receiver, a namesake shift in the frequency of a wave
as the source moves relative to the observer.
ANSWER: Doppler effect or shift
This effect can be used to measure the velocity width term of the Tully-Fisher relation, and, with the
Mossbauer effect, a tower at the Jefferson Laboratory was used by Pound and Rebka to test a variety of it.
Canal ray tubes were used by Ives and Stilwell to investigate the transverse version of this effect. The
introduction of the Lorentz factor as the inverse of the square root of one minus the ratio of the velocity of
the source and the speed of light allows for the calculation of the relativistic form of this effect, which can
be used to measure the radial velocity of galaxies with blueshift and redshift. For 10 points, name this effect
responsible for the frequency change of a passing siren.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [or Doppler shift; prompt on "redshift" until "canal"]
A version of this effect that influences light was first discovered by Hippolyte (HIPP-o-leet) Fizeau
(Fi-zou). The transverse form of this effect happens due to time dilation, and was measured in the
Ives-Stillwell experiment. A star's radial velocity can be used to measure this effect, which causes (*)
redshift and blueshift. For 10 points, name this effect in which the frequency of a wave increases or
decreases due to movement from the wave's source.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [prompt on "redshift" or "blueshift" before they are mentioned]
Canal ray tubes were used to investigate a form of this phenomenon predicted by special relativity in the
Ives-Stillwell experiment. This phenomenon has a transverse form, and the Lorentz transformation is used
to derive the relativistic form of this effect, which can be used to measure the radial velocity of galaxies.
Changes in spectral lines caused by this effect are known as blueshift and redshift. For 10 points, name this
perceived change in the frequency of a wave from a moving source, exemplified by sirens on fire trucks.
ANSWER: Doppler effect [accept Doppler shift]
Claus Jonsson was the first person to perform a version of this experiment with electrons, while
another version of this experiment was used by Shahriar Afshar to prove that light can act as both a
wave and a particle at the same time. The original version of this 1801 experiment produced
interference fringes, alternating bright and dark bands. For 10 points, name this experiment in which
coherent light is passed through the namesake openings, first used by Thomas Young to prove the wave
nature of light.
ANSWER: double-slit experiment
Clauss Jonson performed a version of this experiment using electrons in 1961. This experiment was
evidence against the corpuscular theory of Isaac Newton. The key observation in this experiment is revealed
in the intensity distribution of the certain patterns, which can be seen as distinct bands of color separated by
dark regions, a phenomenon the experimenter called interference fringes. Interference also occurs in this set
up when photons are shot one at a time. For 10 points, identify this 1801 experiment that showed the wave
nature of light performed by Thomas Young.
ANSWER: Thomas Young's double slit experiment [accept Thomas Young's experiment before mentioned]
A version of this experiment showing the principle of complementarity was performed by Afshar.
Placing a solenoid on one side of the apparatus in this experiment was used to demonstrate the
Aharonov-Bohm effect. In this experiment, time averaging the Poynting vectors shows that the
maximum resulting intensity is equal to four times the incident intensity. In this experiment, plane
waves turn into cylindrical waves. When the difference in path length is equal to an (*) integer
multiple of the wavelength in this experiment, constructive interference occurs. This experiment
demonstrated the wave nature of light. For 10 points, name this experiment in which a series of fringes
appears on a film after light is shone through a namesake apparatus.
ANSWER: Young's double-slit experiment [accept either underlined portion]
John Wheeler proposed a modified thought experiment based on this investigation in which the observer
can choose the method of measuring the result, and is called the "delayed choice" experiment. A variant of
this experiment performed by Shariar Afshar involved a grid of wires placed before a lense, and it was first
performed with electrons by Claus Jonnson. Setups in which one of the paths is closed off provides an
illustration of Bohr's complementarity principle, and in its original form, light passing through the namesake
setup produced a series of interference fringes. It was the first experiment to demonstrate the wave-nature of
light. For 10 points, identify this experiment which was performed by a British Egyptologist.
ANSWER: Young's double slit experimen
In 1999, the Zeilinger group reproduced this experiment with buckyballs by heating them up to 1000
Kelvin. The sum of the squares of two properties for objects produced in this experiment is less than or
equal to one, according to the Englert-Greenberger relation. A variant of this experiment which shows
entanglement by deleting information is called a quantum eraser. This experiment's resulting intensity is
proportional to sinc ["sink"] squared of the width times pi times sine theta divided by the wavelength; that
function predicts light and dark bands on a screen. This experiment disproved Isaac Newton's corpuscular
theory of light. For 10 points, name this experiment first performed by Thomas Young, in which a coherent
beam of light is diffracted through two openings.
ANSWER: Young's double-slit experiment
A variant on this experiment using a barium borate crystal is named for a certain "eraser", and the
nature of detection is critical in John Wheeler's "delayed choice" variant on this experiment.
Electrons were used in a variation of it done by Claus Johnson, and the original version of this
experiment used two barriers and a viewing (*) screen. The light from the openings in those barriers
used in this experiment produced a pattern of bright and dark parallel bands called fringes. For 10 points,
identify this experiment performed by Thomas Young, which demonstrated the wave nature of light and
utilized a pair of namesake openings.
ANSWER: Thomas Young's double slit experiment [accept either underlined part before "Young" is read; after his name is read, accept only double slit experiment and generously prompt on Young experiment]
The quantum eraser and Wheeler's delayed choice are variations on this experiment, which
demonstrated the principle of complementarity. The Fraunhofer equation can be used to describe the
results of this experiment, which can also be described with the simpler equation "d theta equals n
lambda". Evenly spaced, alternating light and dark (*) bands were formed on the far-field screen in it,
demonstrating that the wavefronts interfered even though the photons also acted as particles. For ten points,
name this experiment which illustrated wave-particle duality by diffracting light through two small holes,
which was conducted by Thomas Young.
ANSWER: Thomas Young's double-slit experiment
In 1961, Claus Jonsson (CLOWS YUHN-sun) reproduced the set up of this experiment with electrons.
The set up for this experiment when using only one particle gives the same results as the original, except
when a detector is used. That detector being used causes a pair of bands to be formed instead of the usual
pattern caused by interference. For 10 points, name this experiment first carried out by Thomas Young
sending light through a pair of openings, which showed light has a wave nature.
ANSWER: Young's double slit experiment [or Young's experiment before it is read]
This configuration's results are described by "four times I nought times the cosine squared of pi d over
lambda times sine theta." Arndt showed that this can be performed with hot buckyballs. An analogue of this
setup can be created for single particles using a Mach-Zehnder device. One alteration to this setup separates
the components by a large enough space-like interval so that one's choice cannot directly influence the
results of the experiment. The traditional results of the experiment only occur when the trajectories of the
particles are unknown. This experiment helped to disprove Newton's theory that light was made up of tiny
corpuscles. For 10 points, name this experiment in which a coherent light source illuminates a pierced thin
plate and interference can be observed on a screen, establishing the principle of wave-particle duality.
ANSWER: Young's double-slit experiment
One thought experiment dealing with this experiment was proposed by John Wheeler and allows for the
experimenter to make a "delayed choice" to remove the detector. The spacing between the fringes of the
interference pattern caused by this experiment is given by the distance z times wavelength over the distance
between the namesake objects. For 10 points, name this experiment that was conducted by Thomas Young
that showed that matter exhibits both wave and particle properties.
ANSWER: double-slit experiment [or Young's experiment before mentioned]
The "ion" form of this quantity opposes electrostatic forces in plasmas containing dust
particles. For small objects, this quantity is directly proportional to the radius and the velocity
by Stokes- Law; however, for larger objects, it is proportional to the square of the velocity.
When this force equals the force of gravity, an object reaches terminal velocity, and in
aerodynamics, it opposes thrust. For 10 points, name this force that retards the motion of an
object through a fluid, colloquially referred to as "wind resistance."
ANSWER: drag [prompt on wind resistance; prompt on air resistance]
The coefficient associated with this quantity is equal to 24 over the Reynolds number at small values
of the Reynolds number; for Reynolds numbers above 1, Goldstein's approximation is often used to
approximate this quantity's value. For a sphere, this quantity is equal to six pi times the viscosity
times the radius times the velocity, by (*) Stokes's Law. In aerodynamics, this quantity opposes thrust.
When this quantity equals the gravitational force, an object has reached terminal velocity. For 10 points,
name this force that retards an object's motion through a fluid and is overcome by vehicles through thrust or
lift.
ANSWER: drag force [prompt on air resistance or near-equivalents]
The strength of this force increases for systems with a high Keulegan-Carpenter number, and
d-Alembert's paradox deals with when it is zero. Its magnitude acting on spheres is given as 6 pi v R
mu by Stokes- law. In general it is one-half rho A v squared times its namesake (*) coefficient, which
is generally a function of the Reynolds number and symbolized C sub D. When setting the sum of this and
the buoyant force equal to weight, a particle's terminal velocity can be found. For 10 points, name this
force that opposes an object's movement through a fluid.
ANSWER: drag force
The concept of a boundary layer was first proposed by Ludwig Prandlt so that this phenomenon can be
neglected beyond a far enough point. For a cylinder inside submerged in a fluid that is nonviscous and
irrotational, the cylinder does not have this phenomenon acting on it. The lack of this force is the subject of
D-alembert's paradox. Under low Reynolds numbers, it is proportional to the product of dynamic viscosity,
the settling velocity and the radius of a sphere; that is Stokes- Law. An object in free-fall reaches the
terminal velocity when the downward gravitational force equals this other upwards force. For 10 points,
identify this non-conservative force that is proportional to an object's velocity in a viscous medium.
ANSWER: drag [prompt on viscosity]
Langevin's equation states the real force on a particle as the sum of the forces involved in Brownian
motion and the hydrodynamic version of this quantity. The Fresnel coefficient is sometimes known as
the coefficient of [this], and it is often a result of friction between a solid surface and the gas it passes
through. This force is responsible for an object reaching terminal velocity in free fall, and in aerodynamics
it opposes thrust. For 10 points, name this force that retards an object's path through the air.
ANSWER: drag [prompt on "resistance"]
For spherical objects in the transition region, this interaction has a "crisis" where its multiplier drops
dramatically. In the Newtonian (new-TONE-ee-uhn) region, it is equal to one half the area times a constant
times density times velocity squared. When the Reynolds number is low, this quantity equals six pi times
radius times viscosity times velocity, according to Stokes's law. One task in aerodynamic engineering is
lowering the coefficient of it. For 10 points, name this force that opposes motion through a fluid such as
air?
ANSWER: drag
The d-Alembert paradox was resolved by Ludwig Prandtl's introduction of the boundary layer, in which
most of this quantity is generated. In the limit of large Reynolds number, this quantity is proportional to the
product of the square of velocity, area, and fluid density. For a small spherical object of radius r and low
Reynolds numbers, this quantity is given by 6 pi times the product of r, velocity, and dynamic viscosity, an
equation known as Stokes- Law. For 10 points, identify this force which impedes the motion of an object
through a viscous fluid.
ANSWER: drag force
The Carpenter number gives the ratio of the effects of this phenomenon to those of inertia; a dimensionless
quantity more often used to characterize this behavior generally varies as one over the fluid velocity at low
Reynolds number and is equal to unity in the case of total stagnation. Its theoretic absence in potential flow
is a paradox named for d-Alambert, which led to the theory of viscous boundary layers largely to explain
this force. Causing damping in a harmonic oscillator underwater, for 10 points, name this force that varies
as the relative flow speed squared times a namesake coefficient and that opposes the motion of a solid body
through a fluid.
ANSWER: drag [prompt on resistance]
A term for this force is added to a term for inertial force in the Morison equation. The Sears-Haack
body experiences a minimum of one form of this phenomenon, and in an oscillatory medium the ratio
of these forces over inertia is encoded by the Keulegen-Carpenter number. This is equal to six pi
times dynamic viscosity times radius times velocity for a small spherical object in a homogenous, (*)
laminar flow according to Stokes- law. Another law states that this quantity is equal to one-half times mass
density times v squared times cross-sectional area times a namesake coefficient; that law is often used to
calculate the terminal velocity of a falling object. This force is the sum of skin friction and form effects, and
is minimized for streamlined bodies. For 10 points, name this force that opposes thrust by pulling
backwards on a flying object.
ANSWER: drag [prompt on "friction"]
The Keulegan-Carpenter number can be used to quantify the effects of this phenomenon in the
Morison equation. Sears and Haack derived objects that minimize the "wave" variety of this
phenomenon. Vortices created near wing tips can create the induced variety of this phenomenon,
which is classified as parasitic. It vanishes entirely under certain conditions according to
D-Alembert's paradox. The Form variety of this force is determined by shape and is lowest for bodies
which have been streamlined. 6 Pi R v times the viscosity gives a variety of this force that determines the
terminal velocity of objects and which is named for Stokes. FTP, name this frictional force experienced by
objects moving through fluids, the opposite of thrust.
ANSWER: drag [prompt on friction until end]
The coefficient associated with this phenomenon is typically no greater than 0.47, and the power
required to overcome it is proportional to the product of that coefficient, cross-sectional area,
density, and the cube of velocity. For laminar flow, this force is proportional to velocity by (*)
Stokes's law, and this force is responsible for an object's terminal velocity. In aerodynamics, this force
opposes thrust. For 10 points, name this force that opposes the velocity of an object moving through a fluid.
ANSWER: drag force [prompt on fluid resistance; prompt on air resistance]
Criticism of this formulation takes note of the fact that only a few of its terms, R sub asterisk and f sub p,
are shown to be in operation anywhere beyond 230,000 astronomical units away, and that only these and
one other, n sub e, are susceptible to experimental measurement. All others have as their only model one
example which may or may be atypical of the process it seeks to identify. It was formulated ten years later
to attempt to discover under what circumastances would end the silentium universi, or, more simply put, to
answer the simple question of "Where are they?", and its formulator suggested that it was meant less to be a
definitive answer and more to get the conversation started, as this did at the Green bank Observatory. For
10 points name this possible answer to the Fermi paradox with formula Capital N equals capital R sub
asterisk f sub p n sub e f sub l f sub i f sub c capital L, one which seeks to provide the variables which
would go in to the Earth being contacted by intelligent extraterrestrial life.
ANSWER: Drake equation
The interstellar medium contains a diffuse form of this substance that is responsible for absorbing optical
and UV radiation and reradiating it as far-infrared. The Jovian ring system is mostly made of this
substance. A haboob is a type of storm named for this substance. Black-lung disease results from breathing
in the coal and graphite forms of this substance. For 10 points, years of drought and destructive agricultural
practices created a "bowl" named for what word in the southern Great Plains?
ANSWER: dust
Most models of this substance outside of the Milky Way Galaxy are based on studies of the Okroy
Cloud. This kind of substance is modeled by the second component of the stress-energy tensor in the
Godel solution to Einstein's Field Equations. This material can be found in Bok Globules and is
responsible for stellar extinction. Radiation pressure forces it to spiral into the sun via the (*)
Poynting-Robertson effect. NASA uses a set-up with aerogels to capture this substance, which is forced into
a circular orbit around planetary bodies via a shepherding mechanism. Ionized gas and this substance
comprise the interstellar medium. For 10 points, name these small particles that comprise most ring systems.
ANSWER: space dust [or intergalactic dust or interstellar dust or Godel dust or whatever]
95% of objects that emit ultraviolet excess can be described using this term, which also names a type
of nova that is also called a U Geminorum [jeh-mih-NOH-rum] star. The closest galaxy to the Milky
Way, Canis [KAY-nis] Major, is labeled with this term that, along with "brown", labels objects too
low in mass to sustain hydrogen fusion. The most numerous type of star in the Local Group are
known as the red these, and the Chandrasekhar limit is an upper mass boundary for the stable white
type of these dense stars. Eris, Ceres, and Pluto are now called this type of planet. Give this term
used to describe relatively small objects in astronomy.
ANSWER: dwarf [or dwarves]
NGC 6822, the first definitely determined extragalactic object, belongs to the irregular subclass of these
objects. Shaplow and Baade's studies of the Sculptor constellation led to the discovery of the first
spheroidal example of these objects, which are characterized by extremely low metallicity. Examples of
these types of objects include the Ursa Minor galaxy, and NGC 205, an Andromeda companion. Twentytwo of the 41 local group galaxies are of this type, which also includes the Small Magellanic Cloud, which
is labeled as one of these despite being brighter than most of them. Including the Milky Way's satellite
Sagittarius elliptical galaxy and denoted "dE" of "dIrr" in the Hubble scheme, for 10 points, identify these
types of galaxies so called because they have very low mass and luminosity.
ANSWER: dwarf galaxies
One type of these objects is so named because it is chemically undifferentiated and unable to sustain fusion.
Another type of these objects has a spectral class of five and a low concentration of metals. Another type of
these objects can form a neutron star if it accretes enough mass to exceed the Chandrasekhar limit of 1.44
solar masses. Examples of the most common type of this kind of star are AD Leonis, Wolf 359, and
Barnard's Star. For 10 points, name this type of star, whose subclasses include "brown," "white," and "red."
ANSWER: dwarf star [accept brown dwarfs; red dwarfs; or white dwarfs; prompt on stars]
The goal of NASA's planned Dawn mission is expected to reach one of these objects, which was
discovered in 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi in a location predicted by the Titius-Bode Law. Another of these
objects was described by the IAU as having "a shape resembling a plump cigar" and is orbited by Hi'iaka
and Namaka. Still another object this type has a satellite that was once nicknamed Gabrielle before being
renamed Dysnomia. Perhaps the best-known of these objects was reclassified because it had not "cleared
the neighborhood around its orbit," specifically because certain Kuiper Belt objects share that orbit. That
object of this type is orbited by the moon Charon. For 10 points, name this classification used for Haumea,
Makemake, Eris, and Ceres, which was created in 2006 as a new way to describe Pluto.
ANSWER: dwarf planets [do not accept or prompt on "planets"; prompt on asteroids before "Hi'iaka"; prompt on minor planets; prompt on planetoids; prompt on subplanets]
One body in this classification contains a notable amount of methane and is named after the god of fertility
from the religion of the Easter Island inhabitants because of its previous designation "Easter Bunny," while
another formerly known as "Santa" is known for its ellipsoid shape; those two, Makemake and Haumea, are
also classified as plutoids. The first asteroid to be discovered and an object discovered by Clyde Tombaugh
are also, for 10 points, what type of celestial body in the solar system that includes Eris, Ceres, and Pluto
and are named for their size?
ANSWER: dwarf planet [accept plutoid before it is read; do not prompt on "planet"]
The name for these objects proposed by astronomer Julio Angel Fernandez was unanimously rejected in
favor of the current name. According to the IAU, new Trans-Neptunian objects with an absolute magnitude
of less than +1 should be named under the assumption that they are these objects. They have not cleared
their orbital path of similarly sized objects, but they have sufficient gravity to have been rounded. Ceres is
the only one in the asteroid belt; all the others, including Makemake (MAH-kay MAH-kay) and Eris, are
Trans-Neptunian. For 10 points, name this type of celestial body to which Pluto was demoted in 2006, a
body that is not quite a planet.
ANSWER: dwarf planets
The largest of these objects is orbited by Dysnomia, while bodies once called Blitzen and Rudolph
orbit another. One of these objects located in the asteroid belt was discovered by Giuseppe Piazzi in
1801 and is the target of the Dawn mission. If it maintained hydrostatic equilibrium, Sedna would be
classified as one of these objects, examples of which are Haumea and Makemake. The IAU classifies
these objects as non-satellites massive enough to be rounded but [*] too small to clear their orbits. Like
Ceres and Eris, Pluto was recently categorized as, for 10 points, what kind of object bigger than a Small
Solar System Body but smaller than a true planet?
ANSWER: dwarf planets [prompt on "planetoid;" prompt on "minor planet;" prompt on "plutoid" until "asteroid;" prompt on "transneptunian object" until "asteroid"]
These objects are unable to clear their own orbits but rest in hydrostatic equilibrium. It is thought that there
may be two hundred of these objects, but as of now only five objects are classified as this. One of these
objects, Makemake [mah-kay-mah-kay], only has an atmosphere some of the time and lacks a moon; it is
found in the Kuiper Belt along with Haumea, which does have moons. These objects were defined by the
IAU in 2006 and include Eris and Ceres. For 10 points, name these celestial objects that lack characteristics
to be included in the eight planets, an example of which is Pluto.
ANSWER: Dwarf planets
PG 1159 stars are thought to be the transition phase between planetary nebulae and one class of these
objects, which, like neutron stars, cool via the emission of neutrinos in a mechanism known as the Urca
process. The inability to sustain hydrogen-1 fusion characterizes a type of these objects known as "failed
stars," while electron degeneracy pressure prevents the collapse of another type until it reaches the
Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, name these stellar objects that come in blue, red, brown, and white
varieties and are named for their small size.
ANSWER: dwarf stars [Do not accept any specific types of dwarf stars.]
In January 2007, it was announced that this entity's possibly most famous structure was destroyed by a
supernova 6,000 years ago. Approximately 5.5 million years ago it gave birth to the associated M16 open
cluster, with which it is often confused. One of its most notable features consists of elephant trunks, whose
ends are comprised of newborn stars in evaporating gaseous globules. That feature is known as the pillars of
creation. For 10 points, identify this nebula, IC 4703, named for a type of bird, discovered by Philippe Loys
de Cheseaux and later rediscovered by Charles Messier.
ANSWER: Eagle Nebula [accept IC 4703 before mentioned; prompt on M16 before mentioned]
Events that can be referred to as secondary types of these are often called occultations. An Inex cycle,
which is slightly less than 29 years, gives the period of time between Saros series, which are slightly more
than 18 years, and a combination of those two systems allows for the predictions of these events. Some
types of these cause the appearance of Baily's beads. This type of syzygy [SIH-zih-jee] generally occurs
when the Earth enters the penumbra [peh-NUM-brah] of the Moon. Name this blockage of sunlight.
ANSWER: eclipse (accept lunar eclipse or solar eclipse)
For an ideal turbine, this quantity is given by one minus the pressure ratio to the quantity one minus
specific heat ratio all over specific heat ratio. In general, this quantity characterizes the forward operation
of systems that, when run in reverse, are characterized by coefficients of performance. Defined as the ratio
of useful work evolved to heat input, this quantity is maximized for reversible processes according to one
statement of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity that, for a
two-reservoir heat engine, is bounded by one minus the temperature ratio, a value for this quantity named
for Carnot.
ANSWER: the thermal efficiency [prompt on eta]
This person developed the wind-tree model of billiards, which is composed of an arbitrary array of
rectangular scatterers. He names a basic Markov model for the exchange of gas particles between
chambers in which a single particle swaps chambers at each timestep. He invented the name now
used for objects that only transform properly under a 720-degree rotation; those objects are spinors.
A theorem named for him relates the time derivative of an (*) operator's expectation value to the
expectation value of the operator's time derivative and the operator's commutator with the Hamiltonian.
The Langevin-Landau-Lifshitz metric was shown to be the best approximative solution to a question he
posed about the Born rigidity of a certain object. For 10 points, name this Dutch-Austrian physicist who
formulated a paradox about a relativistically rotating disk.
ANSWER: Paul Ehrenfest
This theorem's namesake also gives his name to a paradox involving the Lorentz contraction of a rigid
rotating disk, and it can be derived by applying expectation values to the Lindblad equation. The particle-ina-box initially appears to violate this theorem, which demonstrates the Bohr correspondence principle, since
the probability of finding a particle at a wall is zero, so the expectation value of the force should vanish for
any state. Therefore, it fails to be equal to the time derivative of the momentum's expectation as this
statement predicts. For 10 points, name this theorem, the quantum mechanical analog of Newton's Second
Law, named for an Austrian friend of Einstein.
ANSWER: Ehrenfest's Theorem
This theory derives from the isospin symmetry of nuclear interactions, with particle multiplets first
identified as representations of the special unitary group of the third degree. This system resulted after the
introduction of the quantum number for strangeness, S, which accounted for particles which are produced
strongly but decay weakly in that only strong interactions conserved S. Since the strong nuclear force is the
same for quarks of any flavor, symmetry results. Particles along the same line in this representation share
the same value of S while those upon the same diagonal share the same charge, and in this system, a
decuplet is generally represented as a triangle, and an octet as an octagon. For 10 points, what is this theory
for organizing baryons and mesons proposed by Yuval Ne-eman and Murray Gell-Mann and named for a
concept in Buddhism?
ANSWER: Eightfold Way
Along with Leo Szilard, this man invented a refrigerator with no moving parts. Many of this man's
theories were confirmed by Arthur Eddington, and he initially believed that a stable universe
necessitated the addition of a (*) cosmological constant to his equations. He won the Nobel Prize in
Physics for explaining the photoelectric effect, and this man did his best work at a Swiss patent office. For
ten points, name this physicist who developed the theory of relativity, Time Magazine's Person of the
Century.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
One configuration named for this scientist was discovered by John Huchra (HUCK-rah) and
involves the gravitational lensing of a quasar by a galaxy. That configuration is his "cross." He
considered atoms in a lattice as simple harmonic oscillators in his model of heat capacity. This man
developed a set of ten field equations, and derived the relationship between the energy of emitted
electrons and the (*) frequency of incident light in explaining the photoelectric effect. For 10 points,
identify this scientist who developed the equation E equals m c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This man and his former student Leo Szilard invented a refrigerator that only requires a heat source
to operate in 1933. He created the Olympia Academy to discuss philosophy and physics in Bern. 2005
was named the "World Year of Physics" to commemorate the 100th anniversary of this man's Annus
Mirabilis, during which he published (*) four papers, including one on Brownian motion. In 1919, Arthur
Eddington confirmed one of his theories after viewing a solar eclipse. This man wrote a letter to President
Roosevelt that eventually began the Manhattan Project. For 10 points, name this German physicist who
described the photoelectric effect and developed the theory of general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
One exact solution to a set of equations created by this scientist predicts that rotating bodies
would undergo frame dragging. The Kerr and Schwarzchild metrics solve that set of equations
without taking into account the cosmological constant, which this scientist believed was his greatest
mistake. In Annalen der Physik, this creator of the field equations wrote four Annus Mirabilis
papers, two of which were about Brownian motion and the (*) photoelectric effect. The mass defect can
be calculated from his single best known contribution to science, which posits an equivalence between two
of its parameters. For 10 points, name this scientist who stated that E = mc squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This scientist is the first namesake of a method where the magnetization of a bar is flipped, causing a
change in angular momentum which allows for measurement of the gyromagnetic ratio. This
namesake of that method with de Haas also names three parameters which characterize the rates of
absorption, spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission in a two-level system. This scientist names
a tensor equal to a constant times the stress-energy tensor minus the product of the (*) metric tensor
and the cosmological constant by his namesake field equations. He won a Nobel Prize in Physics for his
1905 explanation of the photoelectric effect. For 10 points, name this German physicist famous for
postulating that the rest energy of a particle equals its rest mass times the speed of light squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
An equation relating viscous flow and diffusion is named for this man and Stokes. While proving Planck's
radiation equation, this man created the idea of stimulated emission. Along with Leo Szilard, this man
invented a refrigerator that has zero mechanical parts. This scientist and Smoluchowski developed a
namesake relation which was discovered during this man's research on Brownian motion. He won the 1921
Nobel Prize in Physics for his explanation of the photoelectric effect. For 10 points, name this German
physicist who developed two theories of relativity and famously stated e=mc^2.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
One model of the universe with no cosmological constant is named for de Sitter and this man, who also
names a state of matter that exists at very low temperatures with Bose. This man posited the existence of
"light quanta" in the photoelectric effect, but one of his most famous laws correctly accounted for an
anomaly in the precession of Mercury. For 10 points, name this scientist who formulated the theories of
relativity and is stated that E equals m c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This person's eponymous relation states that the diffusion constant varies directly with mobility and
absolute temperature, and in his model of solids, all atoms oscillate with the same frequency. Light going
around a black hole or galaxy creates the ring named after this person, a process known as gravitational
lensing. The stress-energy tensor, Ricci curvature tensor, and cosmological constant are related by his field
equations. A new state of matter was predicted by a paper sent to this person by Satyendra Nath Bose.
Name this scientist who explained Brownian motion, the photoelectric effect, and relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This man names a model of a solid which says each atom is a quantum harmonic oscillator. This scientist
proposed the "Hole Argument" to help explain one of his theories. One of his papers argues that organisms
moving at the speed of light would not age as compared to those who remained, which inspired the twin
paradox. Among his "Annus Mirabilis" papers of 1905 are his explanation of a stochastic model of
Brownian motion. This man's Nobel Prize came for his explanation of the photoelectric effect. For 10
points, name this German physicist who developed the theory of general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This man is the namesake of some values which give the probability of spontaneous emission, spontaneous
absorption, and induced emission as a function of time, and model of the universe wherein curvature and
pressure are both zero is partially named for him. Additionally, he also names the circular image formed
when one bright object is found exactly behind another, called his namesake "ring," and he also formulated
a set of equations whose solution describes the gravitational field to which he later introduced the
cosmological constant. For 10 points, identify this physicist who developed the general and special theories
of relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This scientist developed a design with Leo Szilard for a namesake absorption refrigerator. Nathan Rosen,
Boris Poldolsky, and this scientist tried to debunk quantum mechanics by developing the EPR paradox.
Marian Smoluchowksi and this scientist developed a namesake relation discovered during his research on
Brownian motion. Winner of the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics, for 10 points, name this German physicist
who discovered the photoelectric effect, formulated his theories of relativity, and formulated an equation
stating that energy equals mass multiplied by the speed of light squared also known as e equals m c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
Along with Szilard, this man invented a refrigerator that has no mechanical parts. He is the namesake of a
model of heat capacity that is similar to Debye's. He gives his name to rings that occur when light bends
around by a large mass. This man's namesake field equations describe gravitation. In 1905, this man wrote a
paper on Brownian motion, and another paper on the quantized nature of the photoelectric effect. He also
envisioned a theory that led to the twin paradox. For 10 points, name this physicist behind special and
general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This scientist showed a quantitative link between Rayleigh scattering and critical opalescence, and he also
created a theory of stimulated emission for use in lasers. This scientist who names a set of ten field
equations worked with Rosen and Podolsky to develop the EPR paradox. With Satyendra Bose, he
developed statistics predicting the behavior of bosons, and this physicist won the Nobel Prize for his
explanation of the photoelectric effect. For 10 points, name this developer of the theories of special and
general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
The effect in which a suddenly magnetized iron bar rotates in the opposite direction of an applied current is
named after de Haas and this man. This man introduced the idea of stimulated emission while proving
Planck's radiation equation. He also developed the equivalence principle and postulated that the speed of
light is the same in all reference frames, and his paper "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies"
introduced special relativity. For 10 points, name this man who won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for his
explanation of the photoelectric effect.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
With Smolchowski, this scientist names an equation that relates the diffusion constant to particle
mobility and temperature. In one of his Annus Mirabilis papers, he posited the ideas of time dilation
and length contraction, and in a later theory developed (*) 10 namesake "field equations" to describe
the force of gravity. For 10 points, name this formulator of special and general relativity, famous for
developing the equation E equals m c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
One mathematical object named for this scientist is equal to the Ricci tensor minus one half times the
curvature times the metric tensor. Along with Satyendra Bose, he theorized a state of matter occurring near
absolute zero. One of his theories introduced the concepts of length contraction and time dilation as well as
the mass-energy equivalence. For 10 points, name this German physicist who developed the theories of
general and special relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This man formulated ten eponymous field equations, and with Satyendra Bose he names a phase of matter
where every particle is in the lowest quantum state, their "condensate." Time dilation and the twin paradox
are two consequences of a theory created by this man, probably most well known for his proposition of
mass-energy equivalence. For 10 points, name this Nobel laureate, most famous for his theories of relativity
and the formula E equals m c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
An equation relating diffusion and viscous flow is named after Stokes and this man, and an equation
relating diffusion and conduction in ionic solutions is named for Nernst and this man. John Bell resolved
a paradox named after this man, Podolsky, and Rosen. He used osmotic pressure as the basis for his
investigations into Brownian motion, and proposed the particle theory of light to explain the
photoelectric effect. For 10 points, name this physicist who also proposed the equivalence principle and
other hallmarks of special relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
Together with a Dutchman, this man is the namesake of the reverse of the Barnett effect, and he is also the
namesake of a relation that states the diffusion coefficients of ions are proportional to temperature. Together
with an Indian scientist, he is the namesake of a type of matter whose behavior is governed by the Gross-
Pitaevskii equation, and a statistics for determining the distribution of bosons. He won the Nobel Prize for
the law of the photoelectric effect, which he discovered in his spare time while working in the Swiss patent
office. FTP name this scientist who formulated the theory of relativity and proposed that E equals mc
squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
Among this man's inventions are an improved gyrocompass and, with Leo Szilard, a refrigerator that
cooled using only heat as an input. One formula attributed to this man states that energy equals Planck's
constant times the frequency of radiation. Another states that in the same reference frame, gravity and
acceleration are locally equal, and is known as the equivalence principle. A third formula states that rest
energy equals mass times the square of the speed of light. For 10 points, name this Swiss physicist who
explained the photoelectric effect, developed general relativity, and formulated the equation E equals m c
squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This man is the namesake of equations which contain terms for Ricci Tensor and the stress-energy
tensor. Along with Podolsky and Rosen, he names a paradox that was solved by assuming locality with
Bell's theorem, and he is also the namesake of a mole of photons. He used the kinetic theory of gases
to explain a phenomenon observed by a Scottish botanist Robert Brown. For 10 points, identify this
scientist who won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the photoelectric effect.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
Taking derivatives of a quantity found in an equation named for this man gives the Christoffel
(kri-STAH-ful) symbols; that quantity is the metric tensor, which is multiplied by lambda in this man's
namesake field equations. He called the cosmological constant his greatest blunder, and one of his theories
predicted the precession of the perihelion of Mercury. For 10 points, name this scientist, who posited that
mass curves space in order to create gravity in his theory of general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
The Pound-Rebka experiment tested a theory posited by this man, who developed the Entwurf theory
to try and solve the hole argument. Along with Stark, his name is given to the photoequivalence law,
and his name also identifies a set of ten field equations making use of the cosmological constant, as
well as a state of (*) matter predicted alongside Indian physicist Bose. He is perhaps most famous for his
Annus Mirabilis papers, which expounded upon such ideas as mass-energy equivalence, Brownian motion,
and the photoelectric effect. For 10 points, name this man who explained general relativity and stated that
E=mc2 (e equals m c squared).
ANSWER: Albert Einstein [accept theory of general relativity before "man"]
With two of his students, this man proposed a hidden-variables critique of quantum mechanics
which involved a paradox named for him, Podolsky, and Rosen. He co-names a condensate of atoms
cooled to near absolute zero that become a coalesced quantum mechanical entity with (*) Bose, and he
argued for the existence of atoms by analyzing Brownian motion. His more famous theories include one that
postulates the speed of light to be a constant and which was later expanded to include gravity. For 10 points,
identify this scientist who formulated the equation e equals m c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This scientist developed an "equivalence principle" for dealing with accelerating frames of reference.
With Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, he developed a thought experiment illustrating a paradox
involving two particles undergoing quantum entanglement. He described the equivalence between mass and
energy in a famous equation. For 10 points, name this German scientist who developed the theories of
special and general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
With Elie Cartan, this scientist extended a more famous theory of his to allow modeling of spin-orbit
coupling. Mobility and diffusivity appear in an equation he developed with Smoluchowski. The GrossPitaevski equation describes a state of matter named for this man and Satyendra Bose, and he posited the
existence of hidden variables along with Podolsky and Rosen. His field equations describe gravity as a
result of matter distorting spacetime. For 10 points, name this formulator of special and general relativity, as
well as the equation E = mc squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This man concluded that the mathematical difficulties inherent in solving his system of ten
namesake field equations presented a "serious impediment" to advancement of one theory. His
namesake model of solids was a precursor of the Debye model, and he also showed that the law E
equals h nu is not specific to (*) blackbody radiation. His namesake relation deals was introduced in one
of his papers on Brownian motion. He won the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the photoelectric
effect, but is best known for a theory which predicts length contraction and time dilation. For 10 points,
name this formulator of the theory of general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
The constant kappa is sometimes known as this man's namesake constant, and that constant multiplied by
the stress-energy tensor equals the Ricci tensor minus one-half the scalar curvature times the metric tensor,
according to this man's namesake field equations. This man's eponymous unit is equal to a mole of
photons, and his namesake effect is also known as gravitational redshift. His namesake ring is also called a
Chwolson Ring and is observed around celestial bodies as a result of gravitational lensing. For 10 points,
name this physicist who lends his name to a state of matter along with Satyendra Nath Bose.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
This scientist modeled solids as lattices of quantum harmonic oscillators each with the same spring constant
in his namesake specific heat model. He is better known for an advance that sparked his equivalence
principle and that resulted in his ten namesake field equations. This scientist was awarded the Nobel Prize
for a paper published in 1905 that explained why the energy of emitted electrons was correlated to the
frequency of incident light, rationalizing the photoelectric effect. For 10 points, name this physicist who
developed special and general relativity.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
One of this man's theories was confirmed by Arthur Eddington's observations during a total solar
eclipse. That theory of this man draws an analogy between gravity and an accelerating reference frame. A
previous theory of his, which requires an inertial frame, predicts length contraction and time dilation for
objects moving near the speed of light. For 10 points, name this man who formulated general and special
relativity, the latter of which implies his statement that E equals m c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein
The Palatini action generalizes an action named after their namesake and Hilbert that is used to derive these.
The de Sitter solutions to these are maximally symmetric Lorentzian manifolds, and their namesake tensor
can be used to encapsulate the Ricci tensor and the metric tensor in them. These equations relate the stressenergy tensor to this namesake tensor, and the Minkowski solution describes gravitation in the globally flat
case. Containing a term corresponding to the vacuum energy, they describe how mass and energy cause
space-time to curve. For 10 points, name these equations containing the cosmological constant which
describe gravity and form the basis of general relativity.
ANSWER: Einstein field equations
Spherically symmetric solutions to this equation must be static, according to one of
Birkhoff's theorems. Kasner dusts satisfy this statement as an example of a perfect fluid with
vanishing pressure. A constant factor of eight pi times big G over c to the fourth appears in this
equation. The Kerr-Newman metric satisfies this equation when charge and angular momentum
are nonzero. The FLRW metric is an isotropic solution to it. In this equation, the metric tensor
multiplies the cosmological constant, a term which this equation's namesake claimed was his
"biggest blunder". Schwarzschild's solution of it gives gravity outside a spherical mass. For 10
points, name this set of ten equations often written in tensor form, created by the physicist who
theorized general relativity.
ANSWER: Einstein's field equations [or EFE]
The density of the form of energy named for this property is given by the stress squared over twice the shear
modulus. At stresses above this property's namesake limit, plastic deformation occurs. Interactions with this
property conserve not just momentum, but also kinetic energy; such interactions include namesake
scattering and namesake collisions. For 10 points, name this common property from physics whose name
indicates that a system will spring back to its original state.
ANSWER: elasticity [accept word forms; accept elastomers or elastic energy density or elastic limit or elastic scattering or elastic collisions]
A set of tensor equations known as the Duhamel-Neumann relations describe this property when the
temperature field must be taken into account. An integral formula named after Clapeyron gives this
property's namesake potential, which is equal to one half times the sum of the work done by body forces
and surface tractions. For an isotropic body with this property, 2 times lambda plus mu, all over lambda,
where lambda and mu are the Lame [pron: lah-mey] constants, gives the relationship between the stress and
strain known as Young's modulus. This property disappears beyond the yield point, and when stress is
proportional to strain, materials with it obey Hooke's law. For ten points, identify this material property
which accounts for an object resuming its shape following deformation.
ANSWER: elasticity [accept various word forms]
Scattering of this type is described by the Mie scattering approach. In plasmas, the Coulomb
collisions are this type of interaction. The Compton shift in a photon's wavelength occurs
because, unlike low-energy Thomson scattering, Compton scattering is not this type of
interaction. Mass is always conserved in particles undergoing this type of interaction. The ideal
gas law assumes gas particles undergo only this type of interaction, which van der Waals
equation modifies by allowing for particle attraction or repulsion. In this interaction, the total
kinetic energy remains unchanged. For 10 points, name this interaction between two bodies
exemplified by two balls bouncing off each other.
ANSWER: binary elastic collision [or elastic scattering]
A technique that uses high energy ions to determine the properties of a material uses this process and is
called Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy. Objects undergoing this process have a coefficient of
restitution of 1 and effective neutron moderators essentially work by undergoing this process. Space
exploration vessels using a slingshot orbit undergo this process with gravity and the large return height of
the smaller ball of the double ball experiment is due to this process. More famously, the pressures of ideal
gases can be calculated by assuming they undergo this process. FTP, identify this type of collision where
the total energy of the colliding bodies is conserved.
ANSWER: elastic collisions (prompt on collision up until coefficient of restitution of 1 is mentioned, after that, don't accept collision)
The real part of the Clausius-Mossoti factor determines the direction of the force exerted by this. The
Wannier-Stark problem involves exactly solving the Schrodinger equation for a single electron in a crystal
subjected to a constant, external one of these. By Faraday's Law of Induction, the partial time derivative of
the magnetic field is equal to the curl of this. Nonuniform ones can induce dielectrophoresis, and the
integral of it with respect to distance is electrical potential. For 10 points, name this field that surrounds
point charges, denoted E.
ANSWER: electric field (prompt on "E")
The displacement current in Ampere's Law is proportional to the time rate of change of this quantity.
Current density equals conductivity times this value, according to a variant of Ohm's Law. This quantity is
independent of distance from a charged sheet according to Gauss- Law, which is used to calculate it for
charge distributions. It is constant inside a capacitor and zero inside a metal. The negative integral of it
equals the change in potential between two points. This quantity can be calculated by dividing both sides of
Coulomb's Law by a test charge and noting it equals force divided by charge. For 10 points, name this
quantity, the field from charged particles.
ANSWER: electric field [or E; accept electric flux until "independent of distance"]
Crystals that lack inversion symmetry exhibit a linear induced birefringence in the presence of this entity in
the Pockels effect. Sometimes also named for Lo Surdo is the splitting of spectral lines by one of these, the
Stark effect. The permittivity of free space times the susceptibility cross this quantity gives the polarization.
The curl of this quantity is equal to the negative time derivative of the magnetic field by Faraday's law of
induction. The magnitude of this is given by an inverse square law named for Coulomb. For 10 points, give
this quantity, the gradient of the electric potential, which is either measured in volts per meter or newtons
per coulomb.
ANSWER: electric field [or E]
A small transverse version of this quantity is generated in the skin effect, and this quantity is odd under
spatial inversion while even under time reversal. This quantity induces the splitting of spectral lines in the
Stark effect and it falls off as the inverse-third power of the distance for a dipole arrangement. The Poynting
vector is the cross product of the magnetic field with this quantity, whose divergence is equal to the charge
density according to Gauss- Law. For 10 points, identify this vector quantity which falls off as the inverse
square of the distance from a point charge and exerts Coulomb force on charged particles.
ANSWER: electric field
The drift velocity equals the product of this quantity and mobility, and the Poisson equation is derived by
eliminating this quantity by substitution. The displacement field equals the polarization density plus the
product of this quantity and the permittivity. This quantity falls off with the cube of distance for dipole
configurations. The path integral of it is equal to the time derivative of the magnetic flux, and its divergence
is proportional to the charge density. For 10 points, name this physical quantity which when multiplied by a
test charge gives an inverse-square force, a result of Coulomb's Law.
ANSWER: electric field [prompt on E-field]
An oscillating one of these tuned closely to the transition frequency of a spectral line can give rise to
the Autler-Townes effect. The presence of one of these induces birefringence in the Pockels effect and
the Kerr effect, and its splitting of spectral lines is observed in the (*) Stark effect. The energy density
associated with it is equal to one-half, times the permittivity of free space, times the square of its own
magnitude. It can also be expressed as being equal to the product of k and q over the square of r. For 10
points, identify this entity which surrounds a charged object, measured in newtons per coulomb and denoted E.
ANSWER: electric field [prompt on E or the E field]
A molecule with a dipole will have a potential energy equal to the negative dot product of this quantity and
the dipole moment. Resistivity is equal to this quantity divided by the current density. Its total flux through
any closed surface is proportional to the charge enclosed and is given by Gauss's law. Faraday's law states
that a change in magnetic flux will create this field. The Poynting vector is proportional to the cross product
of this field with the magnetic field. For 10 points, name this field that surrounds charged particles.
ANSWER: electric field [or E-field; accept electric after "field" is said; accept magnetic field before "current density"]
This quantity is responsible for changes in refractive indices proportional to the square of this quantity in
the Kerr effect. A vector that describes the directional energy flux density is equal to the magnetic field
times this quantity and is called the Poynting vector. Drift velocity is equal to this quantity times electron
mobility. A dipole experiences a torque equal to charge times separation times this quantity. This quantity is
zero within a conductor. The integral of this quantity dotted with area over a closed surface is proportional
to the charge enclosed by Gauss' law. For 10 points, name this field that has units of force per unit charge
and is symbolized by the letter E.
ANSWER: electric field [accept E before it is read]
This quantity changes the refractive index of a material in the Kerr Effect. It splits spectral lines in the
Stark Effect. The product of it and the magnetic field is the Poynting Vector. Its divergence equals charge
density over permittivity by Gauss's Law. Equal to charge over radius squared, it is measured in volts per
meter. For 10 points, name this vector field symbolized capital E.
ANSWER: electric field
Debye radii are used to dampen out these objects that Gaussian surfaces allow for the calculation of
via surface integrals. The energy associated with one is found by taking the permittivity of a medium,
multiplying it with its namesake vector squared and dividing by 2. Faraday cages nullify them
completely, and this subject of the Stark Effect has a potential that is called voltage. For ten points, name
these regions of space by which charges interact, introduced by Faraday, that is similar to its magnetic
counterpart.
ANSWER: electric field
In semiconductors, the mobility is multiplied by this entity to get drift velocity. In the Lorentz force law,
unlike a similar quantity it is not multiplied by the velocity. Its divergence is equal to the charge density
divided by the permittivity of space. The cross product of this quantity with the magnetic field appears in
the equation for the Poynting Vector. The Stark effect refers to this entity splitting spectral lines. It polarizes
dielectrics, allowing capacitors to store energy in capacitors. For 10 points, name this field whose
magnitude at a location is defined as the strength of the force divided by the point charge that experienced
it.
ANSWER: electric field
The energy density of this field is given by the equation one-half the permittivity times the absolute
value of the field vector squared. In contrast to bipolar-junction transistors, field-effect transistors use this
field to control the conductivity of the channels in the semiconducting material. The SI units of this field
are newtons per coulomb. When this field moves, it produces a magnetic field. For 10 points, name this
field, characterized by the effect it has on charged particles.
ANSWER: electric field
The Stark effect sees the splitting of spectral lines of atoms due to the presence of these, and a time
varying one necessitates the introduction of a displacement current in Ampere's law. Their energy
density is equal to their magnitude squared times half of the permittivity constant. It is the gradient of
the electric potential, and a test charge will experience a force when placed in these regions, whose
magnitude is given by k q over r squared. For 10 points, identify these regions, whose lines point in the
direction where a positive charge will travel.
ANSWER: electric field
The splitting of spectral lines by one of these is known as the Stark effect. This quantity may be
crossed with its duality transform to give the Poynting vector. The cross of susceptibility and this
quantity times the permittivity of free space is the (*) polarization. Its flux through a closed surface is
proportional to the amount of enclosed charge by Gauss's law. For 10 points, give this quantity, the gradient
of the electric potential, equal to charge over radius squared.
ANSWER: electric field
This quantity's tangential component is continuous across the surface of a dielectric. One method for
finding this quantity depends on the uniqueness of solutions to Poisson's equation; that technique is the
method of images. The acceleration of a point charge introduces kinks into this quantity. Its gradient is not
always zero, but it is crossed with a quantity that is, to form the Poynting vector. One law for calculating
this quantity sets its flux proportional to the total enclosed charge. For 10 points, name this vector quantity
equal to the force on a point charge divided by the charge, which can be calculated by Coulomb's and
Gauss- laws.
ANSWER: electric field [or E-field]
One over the product of c and permeability of free space is multiplied by the square of this quantity in a
formula for instantaneous energy flow rate, and according to Gauss's law, the surface integral of this
quantity is equal to enclosed charge over permittivity of free space. This quantity is equal to zero at all
points inside a charged conducting sphere, and namesake lines indicate the direction a positive test charge
would move in one of these. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as the electric force per unit charge.
ANSWER: Electric Field
The presence of this phenomenon in a semiconductor causes band-bending. The divergence of this quantity
is the charge density over permittivity according to Gauss- Law, and Maxwell added the displacement
current term to Ampere's Law to describe how a magnetic field is produced by a time-varying one of these.
It is always zero inside a conducting sphere by the shell theorem, and it is inversely proportional to the
square of distance for charged particles. For 10 points, name this vector field defined as force per unit
charge.
ANSWER: Electric Field [accept E-field]
The application of this quantity induces birefringence proportional to the square of its intensity in the Kerr
effect. At boundaries between media, the parallel component of this quantity must be continuous and the
vibrations induced in a material by this quantity when it is oriented in the plane of incidence is responsible
for the existence of Brewster's angle. The curl of this quantity is equal to the negative partial derivative of
the magnetic field with respect to time, as shown in one form of Faraday's law of induction, and it splits
atomic field lines through the Stark effect. Absent in a Faraday cage, this vector decreases with an inversesquare relation to distance from a point charge. For 10 points, name this property measured in newtons per
coulomb or volts per meter and calculated for a given distribution of charges by Gauss's law, which
represents the strength of the electrostatic force on an arbitrary test charge.
ANSWER: electric field
This quantity is equal to the negative gradient of electric potential. The square of this quantity, when
multiplied by one half times the permittivity of a medium, gives the power associated with it. A Gaussian
sphere can be constructed around a charged entity to find this quantity, and according to Faraday's law of
induction, a change in magnetic field gives rise to it. For 10 points, identify this physical property which can
be calculated by Coulomb's law.
ANSWER: electric field
The energy density of this quantity is given by one-half times permittivity times the magnitude of this
quantity squared. The divergence of this quantity is equal to charge density over epsilon naught, according
to the differential form of Gauss's Law. For two point charges, this value will be k times the charge q over
the distance squared, as given by Coulomb's law. For 10 points, name this vector field, the force exerted by
charged particles, which is represented in volts per meter.
ANSWER: the electric field [or E]
This concept explains why the torque of a dipole would cause it to rotate about its center. The Lorentz
Force Law is a generalization of this concept, the expression of which can be calculated using Gauss's Law.
The quantity of this concept within a conductor is zero and it runs perpendicular to the surface of a
conductor. Coulomb's law can be used to find this property of a point charge, negative ones of which are
oriented radially inward. The direction of this concept is tested with a positive test charge. For 10 points,
name this concept measured in Newtons per Coulomb that is equal to the electric force divided by charge.
ANSWER: electric field
The real portion of the Clausius-Mossoti factor gives the direction of the force that this entity exerts.
An oscillating example of this entity produces spectral lines in the effect named for Autler and
Townes. This entity is used to control the size of "conductive channels" in a certain type of transistor,
often contrasted with a bipolar junction transistor. The presence of this entity causes birefringence in the
Kerr effect, and the splitting of spectral lines in the presence of one of these entities is known as the Stark
effect. For 10 points, name this entity measured in newtons per coulomb, a field that surrounds point
charges and is denoted E.
ANSWER: the electric field [prompt on E]
Particles of dielectric materials may be separated in a fractionation method that uses a nonuniform one of
these. Band-bending occurs because it varies linearly in a depletion layer. Symmetric top molecules
undergo line-splitting in their microwave spectrum due to the application of one of these. Modulators for
active Q-switching lasers rely on an effect in which crystals lacking inversion symmetry become
birefringent in linear proportion to the magnitude of one of these. Its flux through a surface is proportional
to enclosed charge, and its curl is equal to the negative time partial of the magnetic field. Its magnitude is
proportional to one-over-r for a line charge, and it is proportional to one over r squared for a point charge.
For 10 points, name this vector field given in units of volts per meter.
ANSWER: electric field [or E field]
The splitting of spectral lines by this phenomenon is known as the Stark effect, and it is defined as
the negative gradient of voltage. The surface integral of this quantity is proportional to the enclosed
charge according to Gauss's Law. It can be calculated as one over four pi epsilon-nought times
charge over radius squared. It is zero inside metals, and this quantity is measured in Newtons per (*)
Coulomb. For 10 points, name this vector field calculated as force per unit charge, which is symbolized E.
ANSWER: electric field [or E field until "E" is read]
Its contribution to the Lorentz force is parallel to its direction, and according to Stokes- theorem, it is
conservative and curl free. Its intensity in a material is related to the material's permittivity. Dielectric
materials become polarized when placed in this type of region, and its strength can be calculated using
Coulomb's Law. For 10 points, name this region of space that surrounds a charged object and can
generate an electric force on another charged object.
ANSWER: electric field
For a dielectric, the Clausius-Mossotti relation can be used to compare this quantity to the polarization
density. A non-conservative type of this quantity will form as a result of an induced emf according to
Faraday's Law. This quantity's flux is related to the permittivity of free space by Gauss's Law. For a point
charge, this quantity simply depends on the strength of the charge, and it has an inverse square relationship
with the radius. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized E, the electric force per unit charge.
ANSWER: electric field [or E until it is read]
It can encode phase and frequency information when formulated as a complex number, appearing in that
capacity in the Havrilak-Negami relaxation. For the purposes of analytical chemistry, it can be used as a
measure of polarity, and when the material it describes is not isotropic, it is written as a second-rank tensor.
If this value is negative for a material, along with the magnetic permeability, then optical effects result that
include reversed Cerenkov radiation, an reversed Snell effect, and a reversed Doppler shift. For 10 points,
name this quantity whose value for the vacuum is called the electric constant.
ANSWER: electric permittivity [prompt on permittivity]
For a thermionic diode, the Child-Langmuir law says current density is proportional to this quantity
to the three-halves power. It can be found numerically via a nearest neighbors sum with a fourth
order Taylor expansion in the relaxation algorithm. The fact that, in free space, this quantity can
only have a saddle point in interior regions leads to the inability of point charges to remain in static
equilibrium or Earnshaw's theorem. In the Lorenz gauge, the divergence of the magnetic vector
potential is set equal to the time derivative of this divided by the speed of light squared. (*) Charge
density is proportional to the Laplacian of this in Poisson's equation. It is constant in a conductor and is
generally set to zero at infinity. In electrostatics, its negative gradient gives the electric field. Multiplied by
charge, it gives potential energy. For 10 points, name this scalar quantity whose difference is measured in
volts.
ANSWER: Electric Potential [prompt on partial answers; prompt on V or voltage]
In general relativity, there are "weak", "dominant", and "strong" versions of a condition on
matter distribution named for this quantity. This quantity is the second namesake of a tensor whose
spacelike diagonal components are pressure components. That tensor, which contains this quantity's
density in its upper left entry, is named for stress and this quantity. The amount of this quantity (*)
stored in a magnetic field is given by the volume integral of B squared over 2 mu-nought, while for a
capacitor it equals one-half Q times V. Voltage equals this quantity per unit charge, so Kirchhoff's loop
rule can be seen as a statement of its conservation. The rate at which this quantity is consumed to do work
is given by power. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in joules.
ANSWER: electric potential energy
This quantity as a function of r is proportional to the sum over all k of the Legendre polynomial of r
of order k times the kth multipole moment. One of these equal to minus current times magnetic field
over the product of plate depth, fundamental charge, and carrier density develops in the presence of
a perpendicular B field. The Laplacian of this quantity is set proportional to charge in Poisson's equation,
and capacitance is proportional to one over the change in this quantity across a component. For 10 points,
name this quantity, whose drop across an electrical component is called voltage and whose negative
gradient gives the electric field.
ANSWER: electric scalar potential [or emf; or electromotive force]
C.F. Du Fay distinguished between "vitreous" and "resinous" types of this phenomenon. Experiments on
this phenomenon could be conducted using tin foil-lined containers called Leyden jars. Benjamin Franklin
described it as a single fluid which he tried to capture by flying a kite in a lightning storm. For 10 points,
name this physical phenomenon whose direct current form Thomas Edison favored over alternating current.
ANSWER: electricity
The wavefunction of a two-particle system in a bound state that interacts through this fundamental force is
given by the Bethe-Saltpeter equation. The gauge boson controlling this interaction obeys a form of the
Klein-Gordon equation in which the energy is given by the product of the momentum and the speed of light.
This interaction is described by the U(1) symmetry group. Powers of its coupling constant appear in
derivations of fine and hyperfine structure. The only interaction mediated by a massless particle, the
Glashow-Weinberg-Salaam theory unifies this force with the weak force. Its quantized form is graphically
described by Feynman diagrams. For 10 points, name this fundamental force, which is described by the
Maxwell equations and which is mediated by photons.
ANSWER: electromagnetism [accept word forms]
This particle was first theorized by Richard Laming, and it is the only charged first-generation
lepton. One property of this particle was measured by trying to suspend drops of oil in an electric
field; that property is the charge, and was first measured by Fletcher and (*) Millikan. These particles
are produced in beta minus decay, and this particle's discovery by J.J. Thomson led him to theorize the
"plum pudding model." The antiparticle of the positron, for ten points, what is this subatomic particle,
which has the opposite charge as a proton?
ANSWER: Electron
When this particle collides with its antiparticle, gamma ray photons may be produced. Davisson and
Germer fired a beam of this particle at a nickel target to confirm the de Broglie hypothesis in their
namesake experiment and shifts in this particle's energy levels are described via the Auger Effect.
With a mass of about 1/1836 that of a proton's, this particle was discovered using cathode rays by J.J.
Thomson and its charge was measured by Robert Millikan's oil drop experiment. The analogue of the
positron is, for 10 points, what fundamental particle with a negative charge.
ANSWER: electron
One of these particles is emitted when a vacancy in an atom is filled in the Auger effect, and these particles
were scattered off a nickel target to demonstrate their wave behavior in the Davisson-Germer experiment.
These particles scatter photons in the Compton effect, and one experiment reached equilibrium between
buoyant and gravitational forces on oil drops to measure the charge of these particles, an experiment
conducted by Robert Millikan. This particle was discovered through a cathode ray experiment by J.J.
Thomson, and its antiparticle is the positron. For 10 points, name this particle that orbits the nucleus with a
negative charge.
ANSWER: Electron
The Franck-Hertz experiment accelerated these particles at an anode to support a hypothesis of Niels
Bohr. A property of these particles was discovered using a beam of silver atoms in the Stern-Gerlach
experiment, which discovered that they have spin. Its antiparticle was theorized by Paul Dirac and
discovered by Carl D. Anderson, and is known as the positron. For 10 points, name this small, negatively
charged particle.
ANSWER: electron
These particles are captured to lower the atomic number of an atom in K-capture, a type of
radioactive decay. This particle belongs to the same class as the tau particle and the muon. The
discoverer of these particles compared their deflection by a magnetic field and an electric field to
determine their high charge-to-mass ratio; that discoverer used a cathode-ray tube and was J. J.
Thomson. This particle is emitted in beta-minus decay and is the antiparticle of the positron. For 10 points,
name this lepton, a negatively-charged particle that orbits the atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: electrons
The first generation of leptons consists of these particles and their respective neutrinos. The transitioning
of these particles is the basis for the Balmer series. The positron is the anti-particle of this particle, which
emits a photon when it drops in energy level. Robert Millikan determined their charge in the oil-drop
experiment. They were first discovered by J.J. Thomson and were the only particle in his "plum pudding"
model. For 10 points, name this negatively charged particle that orbits an atom's nucleus.
ANSWER: electron
The Klein paradox states that for a large step potential this particle's reflection coefficient is over 1.
At close to absolute zero and confined to one dimension in a metal, these particles are decoupled into
a holon and a spinon. Particles of this type along with a wiggler, which is a spatially periodic
magnetic field, are used to generate light in a laser named for the (*) free type of this particle. At low
temperatures, the temperature dependence of heat capacity is explained by a model named for the free type
of this particle. De Broglie waves for this particle were confirmed in the Davisson-Germer experiment. This
particle is captured by a proton to form a neutrino and a neutron in a form of beta decay. This lepton has
half integer spin. For 10 points, name this elementary particle with negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons
The sign on the charge of these particles can be deduced from the Hall effect. Their mass appears in the
denominator of the expression for the Bohr (BORE) radius. Their charge to mass ratio was measured by J.
J. Thomson, while the value of their charge was determined in the Millikan (Mill-ee-can) oil drop
experiment. Their antimatter equivalents are called positrons. Beams of these particles are called beta
radiation. For 10 points, name these very light negatively charged particles which orbit an atom's nucleus.
ANSWER: electrons
The Everhart-Thornley detector improves on previous devices for detecting these by adding a lightguide
and a photomultiplier. One device named for these particles uses a wiggler or an undulator to generate a
periodic magnetic field. Wheeler suggested that the universe has only one of these particles that travels
backwards and forwards through time. The anomalous magnetic moment of these particles is predicted by
QED to several decimal places. These particles were shown to have wavelike behavior by firing them at a
nickel target in the Davisson-Germer experiment, and they were first discovered in cathode rays by JJ
Thompson. For 10 points, name these fermions, negatively charged particles that orbit a nucleus.
ANSWER: electrons
An undulator filled with these particles causes photon emission in a namesake type of laser. These
particles were fired at a nickel target in an experiment that showed their wave nature conducted by
Davisson and Germer. These particles are "captured" by a neutron in one type of (*) beta decay.
Their namesake "affinity" represents the energy change in the formation of a negative ion. For 10 points,
name this fermion, the antiparticle of the positron, which is shared by atoms when they bond.
ANSWER: electrons
This particle is part of a group that includes the muon and tau. They were fired at a nickel target by
Davisson and Germer to show that they have wavelike properties. These particles are emitted when a
neutron turns into a proton during beta-minus decay, and they were discovered in a Crookes tube by JJ
Thompson as the primary constituent of cathode rays. For 10 points, name these negatively charged leptons
that orbit the nucleus.
ANSWER: electron
Describing their motion was the original intent of a formula containing Pauli matrices, the Dirac equation.
They are discharged en masse in a tube named for William Crookes; in an experiment using a nickel crystal,
these particles were shown to diffract like waves by Davisson and Germer. Hertz discovered that they are
emitted when matter is hit by sufficiently-energetic light. Emitted in beta-minus decay, they became the first
discovered leptons in 1897, when J.J. Thomson determined cathode rays were made of them. For 10 points,
name this ubiquitous elementary particle with negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons [prompt "cathode rays" since it's sort of unclear throughout]
The Davisson-Germer experiment confirmed the de Broglie hypothesis for these particles which were first
discovered by J. J. Thomson. They, along with tauons and muons are leptons and the anti-particle of these
particles is the positron. The work function is the minimum amount of energy necessary for a substance to
emit them when hit by a photon. They are also emitted during beta decay and argon has 8 valence ones. For
10 points, these are what negatively charged particles that orbit the nucleus in atoms.
ANSWER: electrons
The work function measures the binding energy of these things. "Configurations" of them are often
abbreviated by writing the symbol of a noble gas in square brackets. Multiplying their charge by one volt
gives a unit of energy that is frequently used in particle physics. In an atom, the state of one of these is
uniquely defined by four indices, including the spin quantum number, which exists due to the Pauli
exclusion principle. In the Bohr model, these things orbit in distinct shells, but modern theories treat them
as a cloud of probability surrounding a nucleus. For 10 points, name these negatively-charged subatomic
particles.
ANSWER: electrons
One of these is emitted in the Auger Effect, and these particles were detected in a Faraday box after a nickel
target was rotated, which allowed for the calculation of lattice spacing and confirmed the de Broglie
hypothesis. These particles scatter photons in the Compton Effect, and they were the first particles
hypothesized to exhibit spin. For 10 points, name these elementary particles that were the focus of the
Davisson-Germer experiment, orbit the nucleus of an atom, and have a negative charge.
ANSWER: Electrons
Interactions which have two of these particles in the initial and final states are described by Moller
scattering. Julian Schwinger calculated a leading-order radiative correction for the anomalous magnetic
moment of these particles, given by the fine-structure constant over two pi. The use of Stokes' Law to
calculate drag force was part of an experiment to determine one of its properties, and they interacted with a
nickel target in the Davisson-Germer experiment. Their antiparticles were discovered by Carl Anderson,
and the Hall effect shows that currents in metals consist of, for 10 points, these particles whose charge was
measured in Millikan's oil-drop experiment.
ANSWER: electrons
The deceleration of these particles when fired at a metal target causes Bremsstrahlung, and these particles
exhibit the Lamb Shift. These particles scatter photons in the Compton Effect, and beta decay ejects an
antineutrino of these particles along with one. Their mass and charge were measured in Millikan's oil drop
experiment, and they were discovered in experiments with cathode rays conducted by J. J. Thomson. For
10 points, name these negatively charged particles which orbit the atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: Electrons
The presence of only one of these entities allows the energies of one model system to be given as a
generalized Lambert W function. One task in density functional theories is to model the correlation
term, which is the energy of their interactions, and the "configuration interaction" method is a postHartree-Fock method to give that term to any desired accuracy. The stabilization of dihalogenated
compounds in a gauche configuration is due to hyperconjugation, or the partial delocalization of these.
When two of these are not spin-paired, a molecule is said to be a triplet state, and boron forms bonds that
include three atomic centers but only two of these. For 10 points, name these entities, which, when their
ground states are in the highest energy level available, are called "valence."
ANSWER: electrons
These particles were shown to diffract like light by Davisson and Germer. George Crookes developed a
device to transmit these particles, his namesake glass tube. One property of them was found by using an
electric field counteracting gravity to suspend oil drops in Millikan's experiment. For 10 points, name
these negatively-charged particles in orbitals around protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: electrons
An experiment featuring a nickel target and these particles was named for Davisson and Germer and
showed that they have wave properties. An experiment featuring the deflection of silver atoms showed that
these particles have quantized intrinsic angular momentum. These particles scatter photons in the Compton
effect. Two of these particles together form Cooper pairs in the BCS theory of superconductivity, and they
are freed from a metal by a photon in an effect described by Einstein. For 10 points, name this particle,
leptons whose antiparticles were postulated by Dirac, the negative form of beta radiation.
ANSWER: electrons
These particles are solvated in strongly reducing solutions, such as that used in the Birch reduction.
The charge of these particles was measured in an experiment that balanced the gravitational and
buoyant forces acting on drops of (*) oil against their interaction with an electric field; that experiment
was conducted by Robert Millikan. For 10 points, name these negatively charged first-generation leptons
discovered by J. J. Thomson, which are found in the atom in a "cloud" around the nucleus.
ANSWER: electrons
One experiment that successfully measured a property of this particle used two charged plates to try and
suspend droplets sprayed out by an atomizer. That experiment run by Robert Millikan was the oil drop
experiment. In different atomic orbital theories, this type of particle can either be found in a cloud or in
various levels of orbitals. For 10 points, name this particle emitted in a cathode ray and found moving
around the outside of the nucleus of an atom with a negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons
The LUMO is the first MO unoccupied by one of these particles. In a test to find the charge of these
particles using an atomizer and two charged plates, one experimenter employed an oil drop. In his Nobel
lecture, the discoverer of these particles described Perrin's earlier work with the cathode ray tube and the
properties of his so-called "corpuscles." Once Millikan's fundamental charge was found, a small unit of
energy became popular, known as the "this-"volt. FTP, name this negatively charged subatomic particle
discovered by Thomson that orbits the nucleus.
ANSWER: Electron
Marcus theory concerns their transfer, and Slater's rules are used to determine the amount they are shielded.
In the Davisson-Germer experiment, they were scattered off nickel targets, and Enrico Fermi is the
namesake of a "sea" of them that can be present in the conduction band. Plates were set up to oppose the
Earth's gravitational field and measure the charge of these leptons in Robert Millikan's oil drop experiment.
Free radicals have an unpaired one of these particles, and the p subshell holds a maximum of six. FTP name
these negatively charged particles that orbit around the nucleus of an atom.
ANSWER: electrons
At low densities, in a neutralizing, fixed background, Wigner predicted these objects would align into
a lattice. Their behavior when uniformly spread is approximated by the jellium model. In one model,
they experience an infinite periodic series of square potentials, wavefunction solutions to which can
be found with the Bloch theorem. The Drude-Sommerfeld model describes their behavior in a (*)
metal. They are assumed to be detached from the ions and only subject to a combined potential in this
particle's namesake free gas. Their radial position is given in terms of Laguerre polynomials when
describing the hydrogen atom. In an n-type semiconductor, these are the charge carriers. For 10 points,
name these negatively charged particles that orbit nuclei.
ANSWER: electrons [or electron gas; accept more specific answers]
One process that involves these entities is Moller scattering, and the Davisson-Germer experiment used
these entities and proved that they exhibit wave-particle duality. Certain movements of these particles are
classified in Lyman and Balmer series, and those movements are transitions of these particles from one
energy level of an atom to another. For 10 points, identify these subatomic particles that orbit an atom's
nucleus and have a charge opposite that of a proton.
ANSWER: electron
The Dirac equation produced a model of this particle consistent with relativity theory. It shares a
charge and spin with two other particles, the muon and the tau. Beta decay can involve the emission
of either this non-neutrino [*] fermion or its antiparticle, and it can be found in locations labeled s, p, d,
and f. Its name comes from the Greek word for amber, and a beam of these particles is shot through a thin
specimen in one type of microscopy. For 10 points, name this antiparticle of the positron, a low-mass,
negatively-charged subatomic particle.
ANSWER: electron [accept elementary fermions or spin-one-half particles before "muon" is read]
These particles were used in the Davisson-Germer experiment to prove the de Broglie [duh BROI]
hypothesis, and its namesake capture is the decay process of lighter isotopes of transition metals such as
silver 105. A muon decays into a neutrino, an antineutrino, and this other lepton, and an inelastic collision
between a photon and this particle is called Compton scattering. The Pauli Exclusion Principle causes them
to occupy different orbitals in an atom, and its antiparticle is the positron. The final product of beta decay,
for 10 points, identify this elementary particle with a -1 charge.
ANSWER: electron
The Auger effect results in the emission of one of these entities, whose magnetic dipole moment is the Bohr
magneton. An exciton is composed of a hole and one of these particles, whose deceleration causes
Bremsstrahlung. Captured into the nucleus in one form of radioactive decay, they are emitted along with
protons and antineutrinos in beta-minus decay. Their charge was measured by Millikan in the oil drop
experiment, and their antiparticle is the positron. For 10 points, name these negatively charged elementary
particles.
ANSWER: electrons
These particles were fired at nickel during the Davisson-Germer experiment. They interact with each other
during hyperconjugation. Feynman diagrams use a solid arrow pointing towards an interaction vertex to
represent this particle, which is emitted with a corresponding antineutrino in beta-minus decay. This
particle's charge is negative 1.602 times ten to the negative nineteenth coulombs, a value approached within
one percent in Millikan's oil-drop experiment. For 10 points, name these negatively charged subatomic
particles.
ANSWER: electrons
These particles were detected in a Faraday box after a nickel target was rotated, which allowed for
the calculation of lattice spacing in the Davisson-Germer experiment; previously, they had been
discovered in cathode rays. They were the first particles to be hypothesized to exhibit spin. They were
also shown to be the particles involved in carrying current in metals. For 10 points, identify these
particles which orbit the nucleus of an atom and have a negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons
In this process, energy is conserved by the ejection of a single electron neutrino. This process is frequently
used as an alternative to a similar one when the energy of an atom involved is too low. That alternative
involves emitting the first antiparticle to be discovered, the positron. This process causes a change of
element because the atomic number is decreased by one. FTP, name this type of radioactive decay,
sometimes called inverse beta decay, which converts a proton into a neutron via the namesake action.
ANSWER: Electron Capture Prompt on beta decay early
For elements with low atomic numbers, the Auger process competes with the fluorescence that is
characteristic of this process. Potassium-argon dating methods are valuable since all of the argon arises
from potassium by this radioactive transition rather than chemically. The lighter isotopes of transition
metals, such as silver-105, tend to decay by this process. Positron emission competes with this process,
which results in neutron and a neutrino, the latter of which gets ejected. Despite the change in atomic
number, the total number of nucleons is conserved. For 10 points, name this process that sees the nucleus
taking a namesake negatively charged particle from the K shell.
ANSWER: electron capture [prompt on K-capture]
This process occurs if the energy difference between the parent atom and the daughter atom is less than
1.022 MeV. It can be inhibited in particles that are fully ionized. In instances of this, one of the orbital
electrons, usually from an electron shell that gives its name to a type of this phenomenon, is captured by a
proton in the nucleus, forming a neutron and a neutrino. Rubidium-83 will become Krypton-83 through this
process and Aluminum-26 will become Magnesium-26. FTP, name this decay mode for isotopes that will
occur when there are too many protons in the nucleus of an atom and insufficient energy to emit a positron.
ANSWER: Electron capture or Inverse beta decay (do not accept K-capture, as this only refers to one type of electron capture)
This quantity is equal to Faraday's constant divided by Avogadro's number. An experiment that
measured this value obtained a slightly incorrect result due to using the incorrect viscosity for air. That
experiment used a uniform electric field that acted on small droplets of oil and was performed by Harry
Fletcher and Robert Millikan. For 10 points, name this constant equal to negative 1.6 times 10 to the
negative 19 coulombs (COO-lawms).
ANSWER: charge of the electron [or fundamental charge; or e; or charge of the proton]
13.6 are required to ionize atomic hydrogen. 210 million are released in the fission on one plutonium-239
atom. Protons in CERN's Large Hadron Collider have 7 trillion just before impact. Richard Feynman called
it "a funny unit", and they can be pretty annoying for physics students who don't like conversions. Because
mass and energy are equivalent, the masses of particles like the muon and electron are often given in these.
FTP, name this non-SI unit of energy, defined as the amount of kinetic energy gained by an electron as it is
accelerated through a potential difference of one volt.
ANSWER: Electron Volt
This accomplishment was calculated by crossing a special unitary group with determinant two with the first
unitary group. Its first major confirmation was the discovery of neutral currents in experiments involving
neutrinos at CERN in 1974, which led to Nobel Prizes being awarded to Salam, Glashow, and Weinberg. It
was further confirmed by the discovery of the W and Z bosons. Widely considered the biggest success of
the Standard Model, research is still being conducted to discover why those bosons have mass but photons
do not, and how spontaneous symmetry breaking took place as the universe cooled after the Big Bang.
Name this achievement that physicists hope will one day be expanded to include the strong nuclear and
gravitational forces.
ANSWER: electroweak unification [accept other words after "electroweak", accept answers describing a combination of electromagnetic (or EM) and weak forces; do not accept or prompt on answers mentioning only one of those forces]
Richard Feynman claimed that years of revisions in this value proceeded too slowly due to
researcher bias in favor of its first measurement. Gerald Holton accused the scientist who measured
this value of (+) fraudulently excluding data. The experiment that determined this quantity used a
setup involving parallel plates and an atomizer. After using the terminal velocity to find mass, this
quantity was calculated by balancing the (*) electric and gravitational fields. For 10 points, name this
quantity found by the Millikan oil-drop experiment to be 1.6 times ten to the negative nineteen coulombs.
ANSWER: elementary charge [or charge of an electron]
The square of this quantity is defined as 2 in Rydberg atomic units. The root-mean-square
fluctuation in shot noise equals the square root of 2 times the current times the bandwidth times this
quantity. This quantity is equal to 2 divided by the product of the Von Klitzing and Josephson
constants, allowing for this quantity and Planck's constant to be determined using watt balance
experiments. This quantity appears squared in the numerators of the expressions for the plasma
frequency and the (*) fine structure constant. An experiment to measure this quantity achieved a low
result by using an incorrect value for the viscosity of air, which was ionized using X-rays. That experiment
measured the terminal velocity of drops of oil and was performed by Robert Millikan. For 10 points, name
this constant equal to minus 1.602 times 10 to the minus 19 Coulombs.
ANSWER: elementary charge [or the charge of an electron or fundamental charge]
This quantity is multiplied by h-bar in the numerator of the Bohr magneton. For its namesake property,
quarks have a value of positive two-thirds or negative one-third of this constant. It equals Faraday's
constant divided by Avogadro's number. This constant was first measured in an experiment which allowed
oil drops to reach terminal velocity, initiated by Millikan. That experiment, which calculated this quantity's
ratio to electron mass, set it to be approximately one point six times ten to the negative nineteenth
Coulombs. For 10 points, name this value symbolized e.
ANSWER: elementary charge [or charge of a proton; or charge of an electron]
Experiments by both Regener and Rutherford and Geiger attempted to determine this value
from radioactive data; however, their results were nine orders of magnitude off. The quantum
Hall effect is quantized in units of Planck's constant over this constant. Harvey Fletcher played a
critical role in the experiment first determining this value, though Robert Millikan got much
more credit for finding this value in the oil drop experiment. For 10 points, name this smallest
possible value of charge.
ANSWER: fundamental charge [or elementary charge; or charge of an electron]
For a closed loop, this quantity can be found by taking the line integral of the Lorentz force per unit
charge. For an electrochemical cell, this quantity is equal to the negative change in Gibbs free energy over
number of moles of electrons times Faraday's constant. This quantity is generated when two dissimilar
metals are joined together in the Seebeck effect. For a wound coil of wire, this quantity is equal to the
number of coils times the time derivative of magnetic flux in a single coil by Faraday's law of induction.
For 10 points, name this quantity usually denoted with a script "e" that is defined as the work per unit
charge required to produce an electric potential difference.
ANSWER: emf [or electromotive force; or voltage; prompt on electromotive work per unit charge; prompt on cell potential]
Two types of this quantity are subtracted to calculate the Lagrangian, and this quantity can be represented
by the Hamiltonian. An infinite amount of this quantity was predicted to be necessary in the ultraviolet
catastrophe, and the photoelectric effect was explained by stating that this quantity varies only with
frequency. Near the surface of the earth, one form of this quantity varies directly with mass and height,
while another form of it can be calculated using the formula one-half times mass times velocity squared.
This total value cannot be changed if mass is considered one of its forms, while its value within a system
can be changed by work. Name this quantity measured in joules, whose varieties include potential and
kinetic.
ANSWER: energy [accept specific types of energy, e.g. "(gravitational) potential" or "kinetic"; prompt on any of the following: E, U-sub-g, V-sub-g, K]
The Planck value of this quantity equals h-bar divided by the Planck time. The Boltzmann constant is in
units of this quantity per unit of absolute temperature, and the Hamiltonian operator gives this quantity. This
quantity equals enthalpy minus the quantity pressure times volume. According to the First Law of
Thermodynamics, this quantity is constant when no work is done on a system. Name this quantity whose
forms include heat, potential, and kinetic.
ANSWER: energy (accept kinetic energy, internal energy, potential energy, chemical energy, accept work before it is mentioned, prompt on "mass")
The sum of two types of this quantity is given by the Hamiltonian and its "internal" type is symbolized U.
Reactions are spontaneous when there is a negative value for a "free" type named for Gibbs. One type is
given by negative big G mass 1 mass 2 all divided by radius, or by mgh. ATP is a source of this in cells, and
another type has the formula one-half mass velocity squared. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in
joules, which has kinetic and potential types.
ANSWER: energy [do not prompt on any more specific answers than that]
The average value of this quantity is related to the temperature of a substance by the equipartition theorem.
In thermodynamics, the change in this quantity is equal to the heat added minus the work done by the
system. Its value for a photon is Planck's constant times frequency. The total form of this quantity is
represented by the Hamiltonian operator. One type of this quantity can be found on earth by taking the mass
of the object times little-g times the height. For 10 points, name this quantity, the ability of a system to do
work, which can be potential or kinetic.
ANSWER: energy [accept kinetic energy; or potential energy; or internal energy]
The characteristic form of this quantity can be calculated as the square of the asymptotic velocity of
an object escaping from a massive body. In relativity this quantity is a 4-vector along with
momentum, while in classical mechanics this quantity can be calculated as the derivative of action
with respect to time. The virial theorem relates the average value of one form of this quantity over time
to another. An operator representing this quantity is multiplied by the wavefunction in the general timedependent Schrodinger equation; that operator is often represented as the sums of T and V and is
symbolized H. To calculate a system's Lagrangian, one form of this quantity, which is represented by the
Hamiltonian, is subtracted from another. For 10 points, name this quantity with kinetic and potential forms.
ANSWER: energy [or kinetic energy]
The fraction of particles with a value x for this quantity is proportional to e to the negative x over k
times temperature, according to the Boltzmann distribution. The band gap of a semiconductor refers
to a difference in this quantity. It may be found as the eigenstates of the (*) Hamiltonian operator. The
chemical potential is defined as the particle number derivative of this quantity for a system. For 10 points,
name this quantity, components of which are contributed by the motion of particles at a given velocity and
by the interaction of particles with potential fields.
ANSWER: total energy
They are depicted in Grotrian diagrams, and an inversion of two of these values for hydrogen due to
the self interaction of electrons through photon exchange is called the Lamb shift. One named after
Fermi characterizes the least tightly held electrons in a solid. Fluorescence occurs when electrons
transition between ones with the same multiplicity. According to Bohr's atomic theory, electrons exist in
discrete ones according to their principal quantum number. For 10 points, name these values that
represent the energy that a bound particle possesses.
ANSWER: energy level [prompt on "orbital"]
The most common of this type of device in use today was first devised by Nikolaus Otto. In that type of
this device, intake, compression, power and exhaust strokes are executed by a piston. Another type of this
device that also uses four strokes was developed by Rudolph Diesel. For 10 points, identify this device in
which an oxidizer and fuel are combusted for power and which are the primary enabler of transportation.
ANSWER: internal-combustion engine [or four-stroke engine]
The second derivative of this quantity with respect to its thermal and mechanical natural variables is
equal to the pressure derivative of temperature by a Maxwell relation. A flow at a stagnation point is
characterized by a form of this quantity equal to constant-pressure heat capacity times temperature
times speed squared over two. A differential amount of this quantity may be given as the sum of (*) T
dS plus V dp. This quantity may be computed as the sum of internal energy with the product of pressure and
volume. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic measure of a system's heat content at a given pressure.
ANSWER: enthalpy
The varieties of this quantity named for Shannon and Hartley can be generalized by the version named for
Renyi. For all liquids, the change in this quantity is about the same according to Trouton's rule. For an ideal
gas, this quantity can be calculated with the Sackur-Tetrode equation. A definition of this quantity is the
logarithm of the number of microstates corresponding to a particular macrostate multiplied by Boltzmann's
constant. A consequence of Maxwell's Demon would be the reduction of this quantity, violating the 2nd Law
of Thermodynamics. Name this state function represented S, sometimes described as the disorder of a
system.
ANSWER: entropy
A limit to the best lossless compression is titled after this concept and is named for Shannon, who
published it in "A Mathematical Theory of Communication." Schrodinger expounded the idea that its
"negative" form feeds life in What is Life? and a metaphor for its mechanism is the "arrow of time."
Boltzmann's constant is multiplied with the logarithm of multiplicity to obtain it, and Clausius defined a
precursor to it, disgregation. Described as constant or increasing by the Second Law of Thermodynamics,
for 10 points, name this measure of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy
Erwin Schrodinger theorized that living organisms must possess a negative form of this quantity.
According to the Clausius theorem, the sum of this quantity is zero for a reversible cyclic process.
According to the third law of thermodynamics, this quantity is zero for a perfect crystal at absolute zero.
The second law of thermodynamics states this quantity is increasing for the universe. For 10 points, name
this thermodynamic quantity often defined as the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy
Rearranging the Eyring ["airing"] equation yields an equation, that, when plotted, has an
intercept that can be used to determine the change in this quantity for a transition state.
Leon Brillouin [lay-aw breel-waan] coined a phrase for the amount of this quantity exported from a
living system, which is prefixed with "neg". The steps of the Carnot cycle keep either temperature or
this quantity constant. Boltzmann's theorem states that this quantity is proportional to the natural
logarithm of the number of microstates of the system. The second law of thermodynamics states that
in an isolated system this quantity cannot decrease. Name this quantity that measures "disorder".
ANSWER: entropy
For a black hole, this quantity is calculated as Boltzmann's constant times the area divided by 4 times the
square of the Planck length. The Tsallis variety of it relates it to non-extensivity, and the Shannon type is
used in information theory. It can be calculated for a monatomic ideal gas in the Sackur-Tetrode equation,
and it is the negative derivative with respect to temperature of Helmoltz Free Energy. Its discontinuous
nature in mixing was the subject of the Gibbs paradox, and its tendency to increase is the subject of the
Second Law of Thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized S, a measure of disorder.
ANSWER: Entropy
One quantity of this type used for fractals is named for Renyi, and the topological type is an extension of the
Kolmogorov-Sinai variety. The density matrix was introduced to develop one quantity of this type in
quantum mechanics, named for Von Neumann. Bekenstein and Hawking showed that black holes mazimize
this quantity for a given object size. Equal to the integral of heat over temperature, it is the only physical
quantity associated with an arrow of time. Also having notable Shannon and Boltzmann varieties, for 10
points, name this quantity, which increases constantly according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
ANSWER: Entropy
For black holes, this quantity is proportional to the event horizon's surface area. A resolution of the Gibbs
paradox gives rise to a formula for this quantity in a mono-atomic ideal gas, the Sackur-Tetrode equation. It
is equal to Boltzmann's constant times natural log of the number of microstates. This quantity approaches a
minimum value at absolute zero, according to the third law of thermodynamics, and always increases up to a
maximum value at equilibrium, according to the second law. For 10 points, name this measure of disorder
in a system.
ANSWER: entropy [do not accept "enthalphy"]
Adler, Konheim, and McAndrew defined a topological version of this quantity equal to the limit of a
quantity involving the cover of a Hausdorff space. A relative version of this quantity is calculated
between two probability distributions by the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Another version is found
by multiplying the density matrix by its logarithm and taking the trace. For another system this
quantity is proportional to one over four times the Planck length squared, multiplied by the area of
the event horizon of a black hole. This quantity is proportional to the log of the volume divided by the
number of particles times the third power of the thermal wavelength plus five-halves for a monotomic ideal
gas. Its equal to the log of the number of microstates times the Boltzmann constant. This quantity always
increases in a closed system according to the Second law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this
quantity, the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: Entropy
For black holes, this quantity is equal to one fourth of Boltzmann's constant times surface area, over the
Planck length squared. One formula defines it as Boltzmann's constant times the natural logarithm of the
number of microstates, and its change was defined as the change in heat over temperature. The change in
Gibbs free energy is equal to enthalpy change minus temperature times change in this quantity. Measured
in joules per Kelvin, FTP, name this quantity which increases according to the Second Law of
Thermodynamics, the measure of a system's disorder.
ANSWER: Entropy (Prompt on S)
The Sackur-Tetrode equation can be used to obtain this quantity for ideal gases. One definition can be
found by multiplying the logarithm of the multiplicity of a macrostate by Boltzmann's constant. If this
quantity reaches a maximum, the universe may experience heat death. Maxwell's Demon can cause a
decrease in this quantity, which is stated to always increase by the Second Law of Thermodynamics. For 10
points, name this quantity represented by S that in thermodynamics can refer to the measure of disorder in a
system.
ANSWER: entropy
In developing information theory, Claude Shannon modified an equation that set this quantity
proportional to the sum of the probability that a particle is in a particular microstate times the
natural log of that probability. More commonly, that formula states that this quantity equals k times
natural log of omega, a formula inscribed on Ludwig (*) Boltzmann's ("BOLTS"-mons) tombstone. The
Second Law of Thermodynamics suggests that it never decreases in isolated systems. For 10 points, name
this thermodynamic quantity that measures the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy [or S]
Claude Shannon defined this concept for source coding in information theory, and an intensive definition of
this property for gases inspired Gibbs's paradox. Defined macroscopically as Boltzmann's constant times
the natural log of the microstate number, omega, its change often equals change in heat over temperature,
and it represents thermal energy unavailable to perform work. This state function tends only to increase by
the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Symbolized S, for 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity, a
system's measurable disorder.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt "S" until read]
For a black hole, this quantity is given by the product of the area of that black hole with Boltzmann's
constant, divided by four times the Planck length squared. Taking the negative derivative with respect to
temperature of the Helmholtz free energy yields this quantity, which can be defined as Boltzmann's constant
times the logarithm of the number of microstates of a system. This quantity goes to a minimum as
temperature approaches absolute zero. For 10 points, the second law of thermodynamics holds that, over
time for isolated systems, there is an increase in what measure of disorder, symbolized S?
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on S before it is read]
For a black hole, this quantity is given by the product of the area of that black hole with Boltzmann's
constant, divided by four times the Planck length squared. Taking the negative derivative with respect to
temperature of the Helmholtz free energy yields this quantity, which can be defined as Boltzmann's constant
times the logarithm of the number of microstates of a system. This quantity goes to a minimum as
temperature approaches absolute zero. For 10 points, the second law of thermodynamics holds that, over
time for isolated systems, there is an increase in what measure of disorder, symbolized S?
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on S before it is read]
Two entities containing the same amount of this quantity were proven by Donald Ornstein to be isomorphic
Bernoulli schemes. This quantity has a value of around eighty-seven to eighty-eight during vaporization
according to Trouton's rule. It approaches negative infinity as temperature approaches zero according to the
Sackur-Tetrode equation. This quantity's net change is represented by an integral in the Clausius Theorem.
It remains unchanged in the Carnot cycle and Maxwell's demon violates the principle that this quantity
always increases according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this physical
quantity of disorder.
ANSWER: entropy
The Kolmogorov complexity results from its use with algorithms in mathematics, and the Sackur-Tetrode
equation gives its value for a monatomic ideal gas. For black holes, it is proportional to the surface area of
the event horizon. It is equal to Boltzmann's constant times the natural logarithm of the multiplicity
function. When this quantity, times temperature, is subtracted from energy, it renders Helmholtz free
energy. Proposed by Rudolf Clausius, symbolized S, and constantly increasing in irreversible processes
according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, for 10 points name this thermodynamic quantity, the
measure of the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy
The Renyi type of this has a special case where alpha equals one which produces the KullbackLeibler divergence and the Shannon form of it. The Tsallis type of it is a generalization of the more
common Boltzmann-Gibbs type, and it shares the same units with Boltzmann's Constant. One
representation of it is as time's arrow. It approaches a minimum as the temperature nears absolute zero,
while it is slated to increase over time by the Second Law of Thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this
measure of randomness of elements in a system.
ANSWER: Entropy
A relative version of this quantity may be computed for two discrete distributions and is also called
the Kullback-Leibler divergence. A quantum extension of this quantity may be computed by the
negative trace of the product of the density matrix with its natural logarithm, named for Von
Neumann. The expected value of a certain random variable gives the (*) Shannon kind of this quantity,
useful to information theory. The Gibbs paradox is a statement about its discontinuity, and it is expected to
approach zero as a system approaches absolute zero. For 10 points, identify this thermodynamic quantity,
the measurement of a system's disorder.
ANSWER: entropy
One form of this quantity is given as a trace of a function of the density matrix. The elasticity of
rubber is driven by the configurational type of this quantity, and Bekenstein showed that a black
hole has a maximal value of this quantity for a given volume. This quantity is proposed to reach an
absolute maximum in the heat death of the universe. A common form of this quantity is given by
Boltzmann's constant times the natural logarithm of the number of microstates while it can be calculated
for simple systems by integrating dQ over T. FTP, name this quantity commonly described as the amount of
chaos in a system, which is always increasing according to the 2nd law of Thermodynamics.
ANSWER: Entropy
For a black hole, this quantity is proportional to the surface area of the event horizon. The Sackur-Tetrode
equation allows one to calculate this quantity for a monatomic ideal gas, while a better known definition
states that it is equal to Boltzmann's constant multiplied by the natural logarithm of the number of accessible
states. The Second Law of Thermodynamics states that this quantity will always increase in an irreversible
process. For 10 points, what state function, symbolized S, is the measure of disorder in a system?
ANSWER: entropy
Bousso proposed an upper bound for this quantity in the case of a trapped surface topology. The ground
state of objects described by the Reissner-Nordstrom metric is proportional to the exponential of this
quantity, which does not tend toward zero even if evaporation does. A proportionality constant used to
calculate this quantity is one-fourth divided by big G and was proposed by Jacob Bekenstein. Gerard -t
Hooft and Leonard Susskind used the fact that this quantity is independent of volume to show that facts
about a volume can be embedded on the boundary, a result known as the holographic principle. It scales
with area and is proportional to Hawking radiation. For 10 points, identify this quantity, which measures the
amount of disorder for a certain supermassive object.
ANSWER: entropy of a black hole
Its original formulation involved the positron and electron emitted in pion decay, whose spins are
necessarily opposite, and an experimenter who only measures one of them. Name this statement, which
would appear to suggest that hidden variables exist, as one could then measure the positron's spin as well,
giving it two definite values for spin.
ANSWER: EPR paradox [or Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox]
According to van Leeuwen's theorem, when this state occurs in a magnetic system, all eddies must dissipate.
As a consequence of ergodicity, the phase density of a system in this state is given by an arbitrary function
of the Hamiltonian. In quantum mechanical systems, the existence of this condition is equivalent to the
requirement that the time-derivative of the density matrix vanish. In addition to CP violation and the
existence of processes that violate baryon number, the non-existence of this state is necessary for
baryogenesis, according to the Sakharov conditions. The transitivity of this state is expressed by the socalled zeroth law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this steady state of a thermodynamic system in
which the mean value of the system's temperature does not change with time.
ANSWER: thermal equilibrium
This statement can be derived from first principles by noting that under certain conditions, the
function Z depends only on the thermodynamic beta to the minus-one-half, and evaluating the
derivative of the log of that function with respect to beta. Debye's theory of heat capacity reduces to
the Dulong-Petit law in the high-temperature limit as a direct consequence of this statement. The
truth of this statement depends on the truth of the (*) ergodic hypothesis, and this statement is a direct
consequence of the fact that in a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the numerator of the exponent is the
kinetic energy of the molecule. For ten points, identify this theorem which at equilibrium allocates energy
equal to one-half times Boltzmann's constant times the temperature for every quadratic degree of freedom.
ANSWER: equipartition theorem
In 2010, physicists at the University of Texas at Austin measured the Brownian motion of micrometer-sized
beads of glass in order to give a direct confirmation of this principle. It's not a conservation law, but by
slowing down heavier particles, this principle is directly responsible for mass segregation. It can be derived
by integrating with respect to velocity the velocity squared times the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution to
find the average velocity, and it can be used to derive the ideal gas law and Dulong-Petit law. This principle
claims that the average kinetic energy of a particle in an ideal gas is equal one half times the degrees of
freedom times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. For 10 points, name this theorem from
thermodynamics which states that every degree of freedom contributes the same kinetic energy.
ANSWER: equipartition theorem [or principle]
This statement will be tested in late 2014 by the French project MICROSCOPE, which intends to
set even lower limits on the Eotvos (ET-vish) parameter. One version of this statement includes local
Lorentz invariance and local positional invariance. A less rigorous version of it holds that the ratio of
mass to weight is locally (*) constant, and includes the universality of free fall. For 10 points, name this
principle stating that uniform acceleration and the effects of a gravitational field are indistinguishable.
ANSWER: equivalence principle [or weak equivalence principle; or strong equivalence principle; or Galilean-Newtonian equivalence principle; or Einstein equivalence principle; or universality of free fall until it is read]
Lunar laser-ranging observations limit the strength of the Nordtvedt effect, which would violate the strong
form of this statement. Its strong form does not hold in Brans-Dicke theory, and its weak form is joined by
local position invariance and local Lorentz invariance in the version named for the man who popularized it.
It was tested by the torsion balance experiments of Eotvos and the Pound-Rebka measurement of
gravitational redshift, a phenomenon predicted by this statement. A thought experiment of a free-falling
elevator was used by Einstein to illustrate, FTP, this axiom of general relativity whose weak form states that
inertial and gravitational mass are the same.
ANSWER: equivalence principle
This idea appears as the non-trivial precondition in the proof of the Poincare recurrence theorem. An oftconfused fact is that Liouville's theorem is necessary but not sufficient for this theorem to hold. In systems
obeying this stricture, the steady-state phase-space PDF is non-zero at all accessible points; therefore, this
principle implies that, over a sufficiently long time, a system will visit all accessible microstates. This
stricture allows the interchange of time and ensemble averages, so the most common use of this idea is to
derive the theorem that each quadratic degree of freedom of a system is associated with the same amount of
energy. For 10 points, name this principle that underpins classical statistical mechanics and that is the usual
assumption in deriving the equipartition theorem.
ANSWER: the ergodic hypothesis [accept ergodycity or molecular chaos]
This celestial object was originally nicknamed Xena. Discovered in January 2005, it is currently
about 96.4 astronomical units from the Sun, in the constellation Cetus, and will enter Pisces in 2036.,
This Trans-Neptunian Body is the largest known plutoid. A member of the Scattered Disc, apart
from long-period comets and man-made objects it is the furthest known astronomical entity from
earth with orbital period of 557 years with its moon Dysnomia. Announced as the "tenth planet," it
triggered the IAU's re-definition of "planet" which re-classified Pluto. For 10 points, name this dwarf planet
named for a goddess of Strife.
ANSWER: 136199 Eris
This man gives his name to a specification in fluid dynamics that considers a fixed point through
which parcels pass, depicting the flow using a velocity function. He is the first namesake of an
equation which relates the fourth derivative of the vertical deflection with respect to the horizontal
position to Young's modulus, the moment of inertia, and the transverse load. He also names 3
equations which relate the various components of (*) angular velocity, torque, and moment of inertia in
a rigid body. This man is the first namesake of a set of differential equations that can used to find the
equations of motion of a system given only the system's Lagrangian. For 10 points, name this Swiss
scientist famous for his graph theory solution of the Bridges of Konigsberg problem.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler [pronounced "OIL-er." For the curious, the question references the EulerBernoulli and Euler-Lagrange equations]
This body's atmosphere consists almost entirely of molecular oxygen, and the JUICE space probe
expects to visit this object in 2032. Although its surface has no large mountains or deep ridges, "chaos
terrain" has been found on its surface as a result of a large, (*) subsurface ocean twice the size of
Earth's. An icy crust gives this moon an albedo of .64, and it has a weak ionosphere due to its proximity to
its parent planet, the largest in the solar system. For ten points, which moon of Jupiter first observed by
Galileo has a Greek namesake who also names a continent on Earth?
ANSWER: Europa
Geographical features of this body include the Conamara Chaos which is thought to have formed from
interconnecting domes and pits called lenticulae. The surface of it is relatively crater-free, while darker
streaks of iron and silicate mineral deposits are much more common. Recent research has been conducted at
Antarctica's Lake Vostok centered on NASA's "cryobot" in hopes of developing better probes to study this
solar body. Although it has a surface temperature of a mere 110 Kelvin, its eccentric orbit and gravitational
interactions with its companions creates tidal heating in its core; these phenomena along with data obtained
from flybys of the Galileo probe suggest potential for a life-bearing ocean beneath the moon's remarkably
undisturbed, smooth, icy surface. For ten points, name this fourth largest moon of Jupiter, but smallest of
the four Galilean satellites.
ANSWER: Europa
One long-range plan of NASA is to study this moon with the Deep Phreatic Thermal Explorer. One of its
regions is Conamara Chaos, and it is the site of the Pwyll impact crater. It is the middle of the three planets
that form a four to two to one resonance orbiting Jupiter, and it is the smallest of the four Galilean satellites.
This moon has prominent lineae, and the smoothness of its surface has led many scientists to believe that it
contains water. Name this Galilean moon smaller than Ganymede, Callisto, and Io.
ANSWER: Europa
In Rindler spacetime, accelerating observers can see one of these forming due to Unruh radiation. The
cosmic censorship hypothesis suggests that certain solutions of Einstein's equations lie exclusively within
these, which allows general relativity to remain deterministic, and beyond them, mass, electric charge, and
angular momentum cannot be observed according to the no-hair theorem. For 10 points, identify this entity
within the ergosphere, from which light cannot reach an outside observer, and which entirely contains the
singularities of a black hole.
ANSWER: event horizons
In the FLRW metric, this phenomenon is described by a factor with a positive second derivative, a(t) ("a of
t"). Bondi, Hoyle and Gold proposed that matter is continually created as this process occurs, known as
steady state theory. Evidence for this phenomenon includes measurements of galactic radial velocities and
observations of redshift in nearby galaxies. Driven by dark energy, its rate is given by Hubble's constant,
currently around 70 kilometers per second per megaparsec. For 10 points, name this accelerating
phenomenon, a consequence of the Big Bang that causes two points in space to grow further from each
other over time.
ANSWER: expansion of the universe [or cosmic expansion, expansion of space, and other equivalents]
Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail found the first confirmed example of one these bodies using pulsar
timing, but a more prolific method for their detection is the radial velocity method, which looks for changes
in spectral lines due to the Doppler effect. A different method examines changes in brightness of a star due
to these objects- transits. Both pulsar timing and radial velocity take advantage of small perturbations in the
motion of a star due to one of these orbiting masses. Name these objects found both inside and outside the
Solar Systems, examples of which in the solar system include Mars and Jupiter.
ANSWER: extrasolar planets [or exoplanets]
One method for detecting them uses the equation sin i times a over c times M sub p over M sub star. That
equation gives the maximum amplitude of the delay time and is used with pulsars. Although not an eclipsing
binary, the Rossiter-McLaughlin effect is observed due to these entities. The first one of these was found by
Mayor and Queloz. The HARPS instrument uses the radial velocity method to detect these objects by
measuring very small shifts in the spectrum of a star due to the Doppler effect. Of those known, TrES-2b
has the lowest known albedo, which was measured by Kepler. These objects can be detected by looking for
dips in the relative brightness of a star in the transit photometry method. The Gliese 581 system is under
intense scrutiny in the search for habitable ones. For 10 points, give this term for planets orbiting a star that
isn't the Sun.
ANSWER: extrasolar planets [or exoplanets; or reasonable equivalents suggesting planets orbiting a star that isn-t the Sun before it is read; accept gas giant planet until YGKOW G1; prompt on planet]
Butler and Marcy of San Francisco State University pioneered the study of these objects. The
presence of one of these objects creates an additional Romer delay in the frequency of a pulsar. Types
of these objects characterized by gas have been detected by the OGLE project. Examples of these
objects with large masses and extremely short periods are characterized as (*) "hot." Common ways of
detecting these entities include gravitational microlensing and using photometry in conjunction with a
transit. The Kepler mission seeks to find these objects. Types of these entities that may feature liquid water
on them lie in a "habitable zone." For 10 points, name these bodies that orbit a star that isn-t the Sun.
ANSWER: extra-solar planets [or exoplanets, accept "Jupiters," "Jovian exoplanets," and similar answers due to the "hot" clue]
Amazingly, one of these objects might have been detected in 2009 in Andromeda through the use of
microlensing. When these objects orbit pulsars, they can be detected by the anomalies they cause in the
frequency of the pulsar's pulses. COROT-7b is one of the smallest one of these objects discovered so far.
The transit method is used by the spacecraft Kepler to detect these objects, and about 800 of them have
been conclusively identified thus far. According to a January 7th, 2013 announcement, Kepler identified
one that is a "good candidate for life." For 10 points, give this term that describes large non-stellar bodies in
other solar systems.
ANSWER: extrasolar planets [or exoplanets; generously accept planets outside the solar system; prompt on "planets"]
This man's namesake constant equals Avogadro's number multiplied by elementary charge. This man
formulated two laws concerning electrolysis. He gives his name to a magneto-optical effect that causes a
rotation of a light beam's plane of polarization. A device that blocks out external electric fields is this man's
namesake cage. The line integral of the electric field around a closed loop is equal to the negative change in
magnetic flux by this man's law of induction. For 10 points, name this British physicist, the namesake of the
standard unit of capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
The strength of this man's namesake effect is proportional to the Verdet constant. His cup collects charged
particles in a vacuum, and another device named for this man is a hollow conductor that blocks external
electric fields. This man's eponymous constant appears in the Nernst equation and equals about ninety-six
thousand coulombs per mole. For 10 points, name this English physicist with a namesake cage and law of
induction.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This man names an effect in which a light beam's plane of polarization is rotated by a magnetic field. This
man coined the term diamagnetism, and in his namesake effect, a polarized beam of light is rotated by
application of a similarly-aligned magnetic field. This discoverer of benzene has a namesake law stating that
the negative time rate of change of the magnetic flux through a closed loop equals the induced emf (E-M-F)
in the loop. For 10 points, name this English physicist who demonstrated induction.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
An equation named for this scientist gives the mass accumulated at an electrode during electrolysis, and is
known as his namesake electrolysis law. This scientist names an equation which sets the cross product of the
electric field equal to the negative of the time derivative of the magnetic field. His discovery that charge
resides on the outside of a conductor led him to develop a wire mesh for screening static electric fields
known as his namesake "cage." For 10 points, identify this British scientist who did early important work in
electromagnetism that resulted in his namesake induction law.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This man names an effect in which a light beam's plane of polarization is rotated by a magnetic field. He
also names a law which relates the curl of the electric field to the time derivative of the magnetic field.
Another law named for this man can have a negative sign introduced by Lenz's law, and that law shows how
a change in magnetic flux can induce an emf. This inventor of the dynamo also names the SI unit of
capacitance. For 10 points, name this Englishman whose namesake law of induction is one of Maxwell's
equations.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
One law named for this man states that mass equals Q over F times molar mass over valency.
Optical isolators are based on an effect named for this man governed by a law in which the path
length and flux density are related to the angle of rotation by the Verdet constant. He stated that the
mass of substance transformed at an electrode is proportional to the applied charge in one of his two
laws of electrolysis. Another law named for him subsumes (*) Lenz's law due to the presence of a
minus sign, and states that the voltage is equal to the time derivative of the magnetic flux. That law is used
to find the EMF around a loop of current-carrying wire. For 10 points, name this English physicist and
namesake of a law of electromagnetic induction.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This man built a device involving a wire that rotates around a magnet in a pool of mercury, the first
homopolar motor, but failed to credit the assistance of his mentor, Humphry Davy. This scientist formulated
two laws of electrolysis and demonstrated that an electric charge in a conducting shell induces an equal
charge on the shell in his ice pail experiment. His namesake law states that the induced electromotive force
in a closed circuit is equal to the negative time rate of change of the magnetic flux in the circuit. That law is
the third of Maxwell's equations. He is thr inventor of the dynamo and the namesake of a conductive
"cage". For 10 points, name this discoverer of inductance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This man's ice pail experiment demonstrated that charge in an electrically conducting body rests
entirely on the surface. This discoverer of benzene coined the term diamagnetism, and in his
namesake effect, a polarized beam of light is rotated by application of a similarly-aligned magnetic
field. An external electric field can be cancelled out using his namesake (*) "cage," and, using his iron
ring-coil, he found that a changing current in one wire would create a current in one nearby. For ten points,
identify this British physicist and namesake of the SI unit for capacitance who discovered electromagnetic
induction.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
One object named for this man is used in regenerative amplifiers; that is his namesake rotator, and is based
on the effect of light's polarization plane rotating, which is also named for him. He may have been the first
to represent vector fields using lines of force, and also was the first to insulate a room with metal foil to
block electric fields, creating his namesake cage. Lenz's law is responsible for the negative sign in his
namesake law, which relates induced voltage in a current loop to the time-derivative of magnetic flux and
was included with Gauss's and Ampere's laws in Maxwell's equations. Name this scientist with an
eponymous law of electromagnetic induction, an Englishman.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
In this man's namesake effect, a magnetic field rotates the plane of polarized light. This man was
the first to produce sub-freezing temperatures in the laboratory, and he developed the laws of
electrolysis. This man developed the idea of "lines of force" to describe electric and magnetic fields,
and invented the first (*) dynamo. His namesake law states that the negative time rate of change of the
magnetic flux through a closed loop equals the induced emf (E-M-F) in the loop. For 10 points, name this
English physicist who demonstrated induction.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
One device named for this man is useful in optical isolators and turn the polarization of light. This is his
rotator. An experiment conducted by this man showed that an electric charge enclosed in a conducting shell
imparts an equal charge on that shell, and is his ice pail experiment. He discovered many materials
exhibited weak repulsion from external magnetic fields, and coined the term diamagnetism. Another device
named for this man consists of an enclosure formed by a mesh of conducting material, and is his cage. The
discoverer of benzene was, for ten points, this English physicist, best known for discovering his namesake
law of induction.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This physicist's namesake effect revealed a connection between optics and electromagnetism and is
also known as magnetically induced circular birefringence. In an experiment named for him, a
charged sphere lowered into an uncharged ice pail induces an equal and opposite charge on the ice
pail. That experiment is the basis behind his namesake (*) cage. His most well-known law includes a
minus sign as a consequence of induced electric current flowing in such a direction as to oppose the change
that induced it. That law states that induced emf is equal to the negative time derivative of magnetic flux.
For 10 points, name this physicist who names a law of induction and the SI unit of capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This scientist names a device in which charged particles in a vacuum hit a metal, creating a current-his namesake "cup." The density of electrons in a plasma such as the interstellar medium can be
measured by observing one phenomenon named for this scientist in which a plane-polarized light in
the presence of a B-field undergoes a rotation of the plane of polarization. The minus sign in one
equation named for him is due to (*) Lenz's Law. This scientist names a device which blocks external
electric fields from propagating inside, which might cause you to lose cell phone reception. This scientist
names an equation states that minus the time derivative of the magnetic flux equals the induced emf. For 10
points, name this scientist who names a "cage," the SI unit for capacitance, and a "law of induction."
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This physicist is the namesake of a rotator used in amplifiers which uses his namesake effect, in which
the plane of polarization for a light beam is rotated by a magnetic field. His namesake cage effectively
blocks electromagnetic waves, and his namesake law relates induced voltage in a closed loop with the
change in magnetic flux. For 10 points, identify this namesake of a law of induction in Maxwell's
Equations, who is also the namesake of the SI unit for capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This man used an experiment containing a charged metal ball, insulating thread, and an ice-pail to confirm
Gauss's law. Liquids may contain this man's namesake ripples, and alongside Joseph Henry, this man
discovered that moving a magnet near a conducting loop can cause a current in the loop. The creator of a
(*) direct-current generator that produces an emf constant in time, this man names a device that causes the
total electric field at every point inside it to be zero; that is his namesake "cage." For 10 points, name this
man with a namesake law of induction and whom the SI unit of capacitance is named after.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
The Verdet constant describes his eponymous effect involving the rotation of light polarization in a
magnetic field. His cup directly measures ion currents collected by a shielded electrode and his
investigations into materials that partially expel external magnetic fields from their interior led him to name
the phenomenon diamagnetism. The spreading of charge on the surface of a hollow conductor to produce no
electric field inside is known as his cage. He also gives his name to a constant equal to the coulombs per
mole of electrons and to the quantity describing the ratio of potential difference to stored charge. For 10
points, name this British scientist who has a law of induction and an eponymous unit of capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This man names the constant equal to the charge of one mole of electrons. He showed that polarized
light passing through a magnetic field changes its plane of polarization in his namesake rotation. This
scientist names a law that states that induced electromotive force in a coil is equal to the negative of the
rate of change of magnetic flux times the number of turns in the coil, his law of induction. For 10 points,
identify this physicist who names the SI unit of capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
One device named for this man is used in optical isolators and is governed in part by the Verdet constant.
That device, known as his rotator, makes use of his eponymous effect, whereby ferromagnetic resonance
leads to circular birefringence to change the polarization angle of light upon application of a magnetic field.
One law named for him makes use of his eponymous constant, which has a value of about 96,000 Coulombs
per mole. Another law named for him concerns the relationship between the time derivative of magnetic
flux and the electromotive force it generates. For 10 points, identify this namesake of a law of induction and
of the SI unit for capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This man's namesake cup is designed to capture charged particles in a vacuum, while Coulomb or this man
name the efficiency of charge transfer in electrochemical reactions. A mesh of conducting material blocking
out external electric fields is his namesake cage, and Gibbs free energy can be written as the negative of
number of electrons times reduction potential times his namesake constant. The production of emf resulting
from a changing magnetic field is one of Maxwell's equations, this man's law of induction. For 10 points,
name this English scientist who also lends his name to the unit of capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
A nonlinear standing wave named for this man describes the ripples on a fluid inside a vibrating
container. An isolator sometimes named for this man lets light pass in only one direction by making
use of a magnetic field to rotate the polarization of light proportional to a material's Verdet constant,
his namesake effect. He described a paradox that considers a group of three situations in which the
EMF is predicted to be zero using magnetic flux lines, and he determined (*) ninety-six kilojoules per
volt gram equivalent was the amount of electrical charge per mole of electrons. A device that protects the
interior from outside electromagnetic waves is known as his namesake cage. For 10 points, name this
English physicist namesake of a law of induction and who lends his name to the standard unit of
capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This scientist names a conducting metallic chamber used to measure current in ion implantation
and mass spectrometry. This person showed that a charged metal sphere induces an opposite charge
on a metal ice pail, thus discovering the principle behind electrostatic shielding. An equation of this
scientist is incorporated into Maxwell's equation as the curl of electric field equals negative partial
time derivative of magnetic field. The negative sign in that equation is explained by (*) Lenz's law,
and it more commonly as electromotive force is proportional to the time derivative of magnetic flux. The SI
unit for capacitance is named for this person. For 10 points, identify this namesake of a "law of induction"
often used with dynamos.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
This law can be used to find the stepdown voltage of a transformer given the turns of the two coils. A
modification of this law sets the curl of E equal to negative d B over d t, as part of Maxwell's laws. The
negative sign in this law gives the direction which the induced current will flow, which is a statement of
Lenz' law. It states that the change in magnetic flux through a loop is equal to the EMF. For 10 points,
identify this law of electromagnetic induction named for a Brit.
ANSWER: Faraday's Law of induction
In differential form, this equation states that the curl of the electric field is equal to the negative partial
differential with respect to time of the magnetic field. As a consequence of Lenz's Law, this equation
contains a minus sign. The dynamo creates DC current due to this equation. For 10 points, name this
equation discovered by a British physicist which states that the negative of the rate of change of magnetic
flux times the number of turns in a coil is equal to the induced emf in a coil.
ANSWER: Faraday's law of induction
Scharnhorst calculated that this phenomenon occurs as a result of the Casimir effect. The EPR
Paradox noted that this must happen in an entangled system, and for larger systems it would require
the presence of either negative energy or tachyons. Cerenkov radiation is emitted when this occurs in a
medium with a high index of refraction, and in special relativity it is equivalent to traveling backwards
in time. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a particle travels faster than three times ten to
the eighth meters per second.
ANSWER: faster-than-light travel [accept FTL; accept supraluminal travel; accept other reasonable equivalents]
This property is demonstrated by the quantum non-local connection and a delayed choice quantum
eraser. Quantum entanglement appears to demonstrate this property, while the Heim Theory states
that it may be possible to achieve this property by using magnetic fields to enter a higher-dimensional
space. The Alcubierre drive is a theoretical method for achieving this though traveling though
distorted (*) space-time. In Einstein's theory of relativity, this property is equivalent to time travel. This
property is said to be present in tachyons, particles that move backwards through time. Tachyons are said
to have the strange nature of gaining speed as they lose energy, which makes this property possible. For 10
points, name this theoretical property, which refers to faster than light travel.
ANSWER: Superluminosity [accept Faster than light or FTL before mentioned]
One mechanism named for this man explains the scattering of supernova shocks by magnetic mirrors
and is known as his first-order acceleration. A method for calculating the transition rate from a
single eigenstate to a continuum of eigenstates relates the transition probability to the matrix element
for the interaction and is known as this man's (*) "golden rule." The highest-energy quantum state
available at absolute zero is referred to as his "energy," which occurs in the middle of the band gap for
semiconductors. The first namesake of a statistical distribution modeling particles which obey the Pauli
Exclusion Principle along with Dirac, for 10 points, identify this namesake of half-integer spin particles, an
Italian physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
The acceleration named for this person can take place when particles repeatedly cross the shock front
caused by a supernova. The type of gas named for this person exerts pressure even at absolute zero.
This person and Paul Dirac worked out the statistical distribution of particles that obey the Pauli
Exclusion Principle, which is why such particles are named for this person. Those particles, which
have non-integer spins, are contrasted with particles named for Satyendra Nath Bose. Name this
Italian American who created Chicago Pile-1 in 1942, the first man-made nuclear chain reaction.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This man names a phenomenon that charged particles undergo when repeatedly reflected by a
magnetic mirror, his namesake acceleration. In a semiconductor, he names the energy of the highest
occupied quantum state. The probability of a quantum eigenstate transition is given by his "Golden
Rule". This man's theory of beta decay posited the creation of a neutrino via the weak force. With
(*) Dirac, this scientist names the distribution followed by particles of half-integer spin, which also carry
his name. This man discovered several new elements by irradiation with slow neutrons, and he names
element number 100. For 10 points, name this Italian physicist who created the first self-sustaining nuclear
chain reaction and participated in the Manhattan Project.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
Charged particles that encounter a magnetic mirror experience this man's namesake acceleration, and the
idea that the existence of advanced extraterrestrial life in the Milky Way would mean we should see signs of
them such as spacecrafts is known as his paradox. The highest occupied state of a system of electrons at
absolute zero is an energy named for this man. He and Dirac name a set of statistics describing gases made
of protons, neutrons, or electrons, all of which are particles named for this man that possess half-integer
spin, unlike bosons. For 10 points, name this Italian physicist who developed the first sustained nuclear
chain reaction.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi [accept Fermi-Hart paradox until "this man" in first sentence]
With a British physicist, this scientist names a distribution containing the reciprocal of the
exponential of a Boltzmann factor, plus one. He is the namesake of the only gamma-ray space
telescope, and the transition state from one energy eigenstate of a quantum system into a continuum
is known as his (*) "Golden Rule". He also names the 100th element, the last that can be prepared in
macroscopic quantities, and he names a class of subatomic particles which includes all quarks and leptons.
His namesake lab is located in Chicago, where he also created the first nuclear reactor. For ten points, name
this Italian-American physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This scientist's "golden rule" was developed in the process of creating a theory of beta decay that
incorporated the neutrino, a particle whose name he coined. This scientist is the namesake of the
institution home to the Tevatron, which is a "lab" in Illinois. This man names a set of statistics used
to describe particles that obey the (*) Pauli exclusion principle, with Dirac. For 10 points, name this
Italian physicist who directed the first self-sustaining nuclear fission reaction at the University of Chicago.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This man developed a statement which gives the probability of the occurrence of a transition during a
perturbation. A boundary that separates unfilled orbitals from filled ones at absolute zero is a constant
energy surface in k-space named for this man. An energy level named for him is equal the chemical
potential at absolute zero. Particles named for him obey the statistics named for this man and Paul Dirac,
and he is also the namesake of certain "problems" which involve the approximation of quantities within an
appropriate order of magnitude. For 10 points, identify this Italian-America physicist who lends his name to
a laboratory located near Chicago.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This scientist invented an analog computer called the Monte Carlo trolley in order to facilitate his studies
of neutron transport, and charged particles reflected off a magnetic mirror undergo his namesake
acceleration. Perturbation theory uses his "golden rule." A facility named for him is the location of the
DZero and CDF experiments, which discovered the top quark in 1995. That facility, which is home to the
Tevatron particle accelerator, is located in Batavia, Illinois. Particles named for this man have half-integer
spin and include leptons and quarks. For 10 points, identify this Italian-American physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This man lends his name to a "sea" of electrons of varying energy states, whose value is equal to
chemical potential at absolute zero. He names a type of problem which involves the estimation of
commonly observed entities. Along with Dirac, he names statistical distribution for a set of particles
with half-integer spin that obey the Pauli Exclusion Principle which are contrasted with bosons. For 10
points, identify this Italian physicist who lends his name to an institute for high energy physics research
located in Batavia, Illinois.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
A model named for this man and Ulam describes particles that undergo repeated reflection due to repeated
reflection; those particles undergo his namesake acceleration. He is the first namesake of a statistical
distribution with a plus one term in the denominator. The Drake equation is an attempt to explain this man's
namesake paradox. When a quantum system is perturbed, the transition rate between eigenstates is given by
this man's namesake golden rule. He imagined the weak nuclear force to be a result of four particles
meeting at one vertex, his namesake interaction, and those particles all have half-integer spin, making them
his namesake particles. Name this Italian physicist who is the namesake of a national laboratory in Illinois.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
The Drake equation is considered an example of the "problems" named for this man, which use a
series of calculations to extrapolate answers with minimal data. Eigenstate transition rate due to
perturbation can be calculated using his "Golden Rule," while the energy of the highest occupied
quantum state of a system is known as his namesake energy. Half integer spins particles, which obey
statistics named for this man and Dirac, are named for this man and include half-integer spin particles like
leptons and quarks. For 10 points, identify this Italian-born physicist, also the name of a famous lab in
Illinois.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This man names a law used to calculate the transition rate between eigenstates in a quantum setting.
This man's "Golden Rule" is used in perturbation theory. This man's paradox asks why no
extraterrestrial civilizations have been seen despite the universe being large and old enough to
produce them. Along with [*] Dirac, this man names statistics dealing with the energies of single particles
in multi-particle systems. His namesake particles obey the Pauli-exclusion principle and have half-integer
spins. The man who directed the first nuclear fission reaction was, for 10 points, what Italian-American
physicist?
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
The de Hass-van Alphen and Shubnikov-de Hass effects describe oscillations that can be used to measure
the cross section of the surface named for this man. A method used for calculation of the transition rate
from one eigenstate to a continuum of eigenstates is known as his golden rule and at zero temperature the
chemical potential is equal to his namesake level. Along with Dirac, he names a set of statistics used to
describe particles with spin 1/2. He is more famous for conducting an experiment at a squash court at the
University of Chicago leading to the discovery of fission. For 10 points, name this Italian-American
physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
With Walker, this man names a transport process used in general relativity to find a reference frame in
which all curvature is due to mass-energy. Time-dependent perturbation theory can be used to show that
transition rates in the sudden approximation follow his namesake "golden rule." At absolute zero, unfilled
orbitals are separated from filled orbitals in momentum space by his namesake surface and his namesake
energy equals the chemical potential. He lends his name to particles that obey the Pauli exclusion principle;
those particles are governed by the statistics named for this man and Dirac. For 10 points, name this
physicist who produced the first sustained nuclear chain reaction.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
A phenomenon named for this physicist occurs when electrons in the valence band can jump to the
conducting band by means of his namesake arc. He is the first namesake of an experiment which simulated
vibrations on a string and found quasi-periodic behaviour. He's not Landau, but the Luttinger liquid model
is a one-dimensional version of his liquid model that describes helium-3 and reasonably approximates cold
metals. This physicist names a diffusion equation that equates del squared of q with d q d tau, where q is the
slowing density and tau is his namesake age; that equation describes neutron capture. Particles at the energy
named for him are at the highest quantum state for the system at absolute zero, which is his level. For 10
points, name this Italian physicist whose namesake particles are subject to the Pauli exclusion principle.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
That the transition rate is only dependent on the square of the matrix of the Hermitian operator
between initial and final states is known as this man's "golden rule." This namesake of the one
hundredth element also names particles that can each occupy only one quantum state at a time, in
contrast to (*) bosons, and those particles are described by a statistical system named for this man and
Dirac. The namesake of a particle accelerator "lab" in Illinois, for 10 points name this Italian-born physicist
who created the first sustained nuclear chain reaction.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
Particles named for this physicist have antisymmetric wavefunctions under exchange. A result named for
him gives the probability of transitions between quantum states. Neutron stars can be modelled as his
namesake type of "gas" supported by degeneracy pressure. Particles that obey the Pauli Exclusion principle
follow statistics named for him and Dirac. With Leo Szilard, this man was responsible for Chicago-Pile 1,
the first nuclear reactor. He gives his name to particles with half-integer spin, contrasted with bosons. For
10 points, name this Italian-born physicist who worked on the Manhattan project.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This physicist is the namesake of the highest energy level of a group of electrons and, relatedly, an energy
level that has a fifty percent chance of being occupied by an electron. This scientist and Dirac working
independently developed a statistical model for the behavior of particles that obey the Pauli Exclusion
Principle, and those particles are named after this man. At the University of Chicago, this scientist worked
on developing the first nuclear reactor. The Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope has been named in
honor of this person, as has the largest particle accelerator in the United States.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
A technique for calculating decay rates between eigenstates using matrix elements is known as this man's
"Golden Rule," and the highest occupied state in a semiconductor is the "level" named for this man. Along
with Paul Dirac, this man developed a namesake "statistics" used for particles of half integer spin. This man
also lends his name to particles that cannot occupy the same state as another that includes electrons,
contrasting with bosons. For 10 points, identify this physicist who, under the stadium of the University of
Chicago, constructed the world's first nuclear reactor.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
This man's namesake paradox asks why, if alien life exists, it has not contacted Earth. He
developed a set of statistics describing particles with half-integer spin, with Paul (+) Dirac. Three
years after the success of his Chicago Pile-1, this man joined Project Y to work with a man he later
testified for at security clearance hearings, J. Robert (*) Oppenheimer. He greatly underestimated the
yield of the Trinity test while working at Los Alamos. For 10 points, name this Italian-American physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
During his first major publication, he introduced his namesake coordinates and proved that near the
time-line, space behaves like a Euclidean one. This man was one of the first people to classify beta decay
and the weak force. While at the Los Alamos site of the Manhattan Project, this man came up with initial
calculations for creating a thermonuclear weapon composed of tritium. For ten points, name this physicist
who worked at the University of Chicago to creating the first sustained nuclear reaction, after emigrating
from Italy.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
At zero Kelvin the chemical potential of a system is equal to this man's namesake level. His namesake
paradox describes the contradiction between the extreme age and size of the universe, and the lack of
contact with extraterrestrial civilizations. Along with Dirac, he names a set of statistics used to describe
particles that obey the Pauli exclusion principle; those particles, with half-integer spin, are also named for
him. He also conducted an experiment at a squash court at the University of Chicago leading to the
discovery of fission. For 10 points, name this man who won the 1938 Nobel Prize, an Italian-American
physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
A rule from perturbation theory named for this man states that transition probability depends on coupling
strength and density of final states. An experiment performed by this man, Pasta, and Ulam was notable for
not producing ergodic [ur-GOD-ik] behavior. A lab named for this man is home to the Tevatron particle
accelerator. This man is the namesake of the half-integer spin particles that obey the Pauli exclusion
principle. Leo Szilard [SIL-ahrd] and this man created Chicago Pile-1, the first nuclear reactor. For 10
points, name this Italian-born physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
An energy level that lies inside the band gap of superconductors it named after this scientist, as well
as a temperature below which degeneracy occurs, creating his namesake gas. He described a paradox
which questioned the commonality of extraterrestrial life, since there has been no evidence of alien
technology. This man named the neutrino, and along with Paul (*) Dirac, discovered a namesake
statistics that apply to particles named after him. For 10 points, name this winner of the 1938 Nobel Prize
for developing the first sustained nuclear chain reaction.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi
In perturbation theory, transition probability is related to a matrix squared times the density of final
states by this man's "Golden Rule"; at absolute zero, his namesake "level" is equal to chemical
potential. His namesake "paradox" states that in such a large universe, humans should have
contacted [*] more aliens. With Dirac, he names a set of statistics for identical particles that obey the Pauli
Exclusion Principle and have half-integer spin, and his namesake "lab" is an underground particle
accelerator near Chicago. For 10 points, name this Italian-born nuclear physicist.
ANSWER: Enrico Fermi [accept Fermi's Golden Rule until 'this man's "Golden Rule"- is read]
This facility was the subject of hearings where Robert Rathbun Wilson stated that it wouldn-t
contribute to the country's defense, but it would make the country worth defending. The top quark was
discovered at the Tevatron in this facility, which is located in Batavia, Illinois. What is this particle
accelerator named for an Italian-American physicist?
ANSWER: Fermilab
Four of these objects commingle at a point in current-current interactions. The superpartners of
these objects are scalars. A function named for these objects gives the occupancy number as one
divided by one plus the product of the activity and a Boltzmann factor; as such, the maximum value
taken on by that function is one. These particles experience a (*) repulsive exchange interaction, arising
from the requirement that their wavefunctions antisymmetrize under particle exchange. This class of
particles which are described by a statistical distribution partially named for Dirac and obey the Pauli
exclusion principle. For 10 points, name these particles, examples of which include electrons and quarks,
which unlike bosons have half-integer spin.
ANSWER: fermions
When discretizing these particles on a lattice, one gets twice as many for every dimension one has.
These particles are the quanta of the Dirac field. When these particles are their own antiparticle,
they are termed Majorana. The distribution function for these particles is given by one over quantity
one plus e to the quantity capital E minus capital E sub F over k T. Two of this class of particle are
coupled over short distances in Cooper pairs. These particles cannot have identical quantum numbers
according to the Pauli exclusion principle. For 10 points, name these particles which have half-integer spin,
unlike bosons, and thus follow Fermi-Dirac statistics.
ANSWER: fermions [anti-prompt on electrons or leptons]
A type of these particles named for Majorana are their own antiparticle and are contrasted with ones
named for Dirac. The average number of these particles in a given state is given by a distribution
whose denominator is one plus the quantity e raised to a function of the energy of that state. These
are particles with wave functions anti-symmetric under exchange, according to the spin-statistics
theorem. All (*) quarks and leptons are members of this class of particles, unlike mesons and photons. The
Pauli exclusion principle applies to these particles, but not to bosons. For 10 points, name these particles
with half-integer spin, which obey the statistics of Dirac and their namesake, the Italian physicist who built
the first nuclear reactor.
ANSWER: fermions [anti-prompt on "neutrinos"]
One use of these compounds takes advantage of its obeying of Curie's Law, using a magnet to attract colder
substance towards a voice coil and forcing away the warmer substance. Aside from their physical properties
of high conductance and extremely low friction, assisted by their nanometer scale particles of an ore of its
namesake or a similar paramagnetic compound coated in a surfactant and suspended in water or oil, these
substances may be better known for their aesthetic appearance. Numerous "moving sculptures" have been
created by exploiting this liquid's tendency to form solid spikes in the presence of a magnetic field. For 10
points, identify this type of revolutionary colloid, named for its most abundant ingredient, iron.
ANSWER: ferrofluid
The "anti-" version of this property can give rise to geometrical frustration and occurs above the
Neel temperature. Heusler alloys exhibit this property, which occurs because of namesake "domains."
Hysterisis in materials with this property causes domains to resize and creates the popping noises
observed in the Barkhausen effect. This property can be modeled with the Ising model, and it occurs
below the Curie temperature. For 10 points, name this property possessed by nickel, cobalt, and its
namesake metal, iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [or ferromagnets; prompt on magnetism or magnets]
Materials with this property can produce a series of audible clicks in the presence of an increasing
magnetic field, via the Barkhausen ("BARK"-how-zen) Effect. Pierre-Ernest Weiss explained this
property by proposing the existence of domains, which are all (*) aligned in this property. This property
no longer exists above the Curie temperature, and materials with this property provide the canonical
examples of hysteresis (HISS-tur-EE-sis). For 10 points, identify this type of magnetism most commonly
exhibited by iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
The manganese atoms in the Heusler alloy exhibit this property that also appears when terbium and
dysprosium [dis-PROH-see-um] are cooled. Pierre-Ernest Weiss described how this sometimes only exists
within a section of a substance known as a domain. The phenomenon known as anti-this exists below the
Neel temperature, while this phenomenon, because it can be overcome by the motion of thermal energy,
only exists below the Curie temperature. This property remains even after its cause is removed, an effect
known as hysteresis. Name this effect found in lodestone, cobalt, nickel, and the element it is named for, an
effect often contrasted with paramagnetism and diamagnetism.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [accept word forms; prompt on magnetism; prompt on magnetic dipole moment]
The Ising model maps alignment of spin in substances with this property. Plutonium phosphorus is an
example of an actinide compound with it, and scientists have observed that lithium gas is able to exhibit this
property when cooled to almost absolute zero. Long range ordering phenomena cause unpaired electrons in
materials with this property to spin parallel to each other. A material loses this property when it is heated
past the Curie temperature, and it is explained by the idea of magnetic domains. For 10 points, name this
permanent type of magnetism exhibited by nickel, cobalt, and its namesake element.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
The way that this phenomenon adjusts to an applied magnetic field in uneven bursts is described by the
Barkhausen effect. A hysteresis loop causes this effect to remain after the removal of the magnetic field.
This phenomenon occurs because an external magnetic field causes the magnetic domains of a material to
become aligned, though that effect breaks down above the Curie temperature as the material reverts to being
paramagnetic. For 10 points, name this kind of magnetism found in materials like cobalt, nickel, and iron,
its namesake.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
This phenomenon is exhibited by small areas in crystals subdivided by Bloch walls; those areas
exhibiting this phenomenon are called Weiss domains. The noise generated by a material exhibiting this
phenomenon when a certain applied force is changed is called the Barkhausen effect. Materials lose this
property at temperatures above the Curie point. For 10 points, identify this type of magnetism exhibited by
cobalt, nickel, and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [or word forms like "ferromagnetic"]
The quantum mechanical description of it was developed by Heisenberg using his namesake exchange
Hamiltonian. This phenomenon arises from direct exchange interactions to minimize Coulomb repulsion,
and the first theory explaining it was based on internal alignment of spin states and was developed by Peter
Weiss. The induced magnetic field becomes permanent even after the external one is removed in hysteresis
associated with this phenomenon, which disappears above the Curie point. For 10 points, identify this type
of magnetic behavior exhibited by materials like nickel, cobalt, and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
Weiss domains with this property change size rapidly with Barkhausen jumps and can be observed
with Kerr microscopes. Those domains with this property are separated from each other by Bloch
and Neel walls. This phenomenon is described by a model whose two-dimensional form was solved by
Lars Onsager, called the [*] Ising model. The "anti" form of this property disappears above the Neel
temperature, and materials displaying it exhibit hysteresis loops below the Curie temperature. For 10 points,
name this property of permanent magnet formation, found in nickel, cobalt, and its namesake element, iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
This phenomenon arises only in materials with a very strong characteristic exchange interaction.
This property is demonstrated to be a purely quantum mechanical effect by the Bohr-van Leeuwen
theorem, and it is possessed by definition by Heusler alloys. Early work on this property was
performed by Aleksandr (*) Stoletov. Materials with this property always contain aligned regions called
Weiss domains. For 10 points, name this phenomenon present at room temperature in nickel and cobalt,
named for its most prominent possessor, iron, a form of magnetism.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
If J is greater than 0 in the energy function negative J times the sum of the quantity S-sub-i S-sub-i-plus-one,
these materials follow a model solved by Lars Onsager; those S terms signify spins. They cause a crackling
noise when placed near loudspeakers in an effect named for Barkhausen. They are made up of similarlyaligned domains which grow smaller with temperature, losing their namesake property above the Curie
point; those domains of dipole moments remain aligned even if the external field is removed. For 10 points,
name these strongest and most commonly used metals whose north and south poles attract, exemplified by
cobalt, nickel, and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnets [accept ferromagnetism; accept Ising model until "these materials" is read]
This phenomenon can be studied by looking at spins distributed over a lattice in the Potts model, a
generalization of the Ising model. The strength of this effect occurs in discontinuous jumps through
the Barkhausen effect, and it occurs in small structures separated by Bloch walls known as (*) Weiss
domains. This effect remains after removal of the magnetic field due to a hysteresis loop, and it occurs
below the Curie temperature. For 10 points, name this type of magnetism that occurs through
alignment of magnetic domains in materials like nickel and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
One model for this phenomenon considers the interactions of points which can have spins distributed
uniformly around a circle. That model, the Potts model, is a generalization of a model whose two-
dimensional version was solved by Lars Onsager and uses a lattice of +1 and -1 spins. This phenomenon,
which is described by the Ising model, shows up as a vertical offset in a plot of the hysteresis that this
phenomenon exhibits. Spontaneous symmetry breaking causes this phenomenon to arise below the Curie
temperature, at which point a material's magnetic domains become aligned. For 10 points, identify this form
of magnetism found in cobalt, nickel, and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [Prompt on magnetism. Do not accept "antiferromagnetism."]
Materials that have this property possess nonzero remanence. This behavior can be explained by
the alignment of atomic moments along Weiss domains, and it transitions to its anti- type at the Neel
temperature and disappears above the Curie temperature. Materials with this property exhibit
S-shaped hysteresis loops when their magnetization is graphed against field strength, and it remains
in the absence of an (*) external magnetic field. For 10 points, name this type of magnetism exhibited by
nickel, cobalt, and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [or ferromagnets; prompt on magnetism]
The prevalent theory explaining this property explains its strongest state, saturation, by positing that all
domains are oriented in the same direction as articulated by Pierre-Ernest Weiss. The anti- variety of this
property is activated at a threshold named for Neel, and materials that exhibit this include Heusler alloys.
An intensity decrease in this property after an external field has been removed and reapplied is called
hysteresis, and materials lose this property at temperatures above the Curie point. Also occurring in
gadolinium, cobalt, and nickel, for 10 points, name this type of magnetism named for its occurrence in iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
A molecular field is involved in the creation of this phenomenon according to a theory of Weiss (VICE).
A system that exhibits this phenomenon serves as the canonical example of hysteresis. This phenomenon
vanishes above a certain temperature, when the spins become disordered; that temperature is called the
Curie point. This phenomenon arises when the electron spins in a material are all aligned in the same
direction. For 10 points, name this form of permanent magnetism exhibited by iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [or word forms]
This property is acquired not continuously, but in small discrete steps, as demonstrated by Barkhausen
noise. It can be explained by the Ising model, and is exhibited by manganese-containing Heusler alloys.
Materials with this property display coercivity and remanence, which are related to the size and shape of the
S-shaped curves obtained by plotting H against M, the hysteresis loop. It is history-dependent and arises
when dipoles align spontaneously, but when these Weiss domains are disrupted it can turn into
paramagnetism above a certain temperature. For 10 points, name this type of magnetism exhibited at
temperatures below the Curie point by cobalt, nickel, and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism (accept word forms, prompt on "ferrimagnetism")
The loss of energy due to lag in the acquisition of this phenomenon is given by the Steinmetz equation. One
model for this behavior sees it as a linking of discrete spin states in a lattice by a positive interaction
coefficient given by the half difference in energy between the spin states. With phase changes described by
that Ising model, this phenomenon's acquisition as a function of an external field can be plotted on a
hysteresis curve. As it is acquired, Barkhausen noise results from the discrete changes in this phenomenon
when a magnetic field is applied to a material. It disappears altogether above the Curie point. For 10 points,
name this type of permanent magnetism held by such metals as nickel, copper, and iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [prompt on magnetism]
This phenomenon exhibited by Heusler alloys is modeled as a lattice of spins by the Potts and Ising models.
Materials exhibiting it are characterized by their coercivity and remanence. Arising within Weiss domains,
this phenomenon exhibits a lag response that traces out an S-shaped hysteresis curve. This phenomenon
remains even in the absence of an external magnetic field, and is exhibited below the Curie point by
materials like neodynium, nickel, and cobalt. For 10 points, name this type of permanent magnetism
exhibited by iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [accept word forms; prompt on "magnetism" before it is mentioned]
A type of crackling called Barkhausen (bark-HOUS-en) noise occurs in materials with this property
because their Weiss (VICE) domains align in clumps. Materials that exhibit this property are commonly
used to trace out hysteresis loops. Increasing the temperature causes disorder and abolishes this property at
the Curie point, and it arises in materials whose domains remain aligned even in the absence of an external
field. For 10 points, name this type of magnetism most notably exhibited by iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [accept word forms like ferromagnet]
The Barkhausen effect concerns tiny inconsistencies in materials displaying this property, which is
visualized on a microscopic level by the Ising model. This property lags when the applied field is changed
in a process called hysteresis. Disappearing above the Curie temperature, it is seen in materials that remain
magnetized after an external magnetic field is removed. For 10 points, name this type of magnetism
observed in cobalt, nickname, and, as its name suggests, iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
When placed in an alternating environment, materials exhibiting this phenomenon lose energy according to
Steinmetz's law. Two important parameters characterizing materials that display this behavior are the
coercivity and the remanence. Bloch showed that the exchange energy associated with this phenomenon
results in walls of finite thickness between Weiss domains. Its response lags behind a cycling applied field,
a phenomenon known as hysteresis. FTP, name this property that is exhibited below the Curie point by
cobalt, nickel, iron, and many permanent magnets.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
It occurs because, due to the spin-statistics theorem, electrons have half-integer spin and therefore
their wavefunctions are asymmetric under exchange of particle positions. Materials that display this
property align their dipoles into Weiss domains which are divided by Bloch or Neel walls and a
(*)hysteresis curve describes the magnetization of such materials under an external field. Because this effect
competes with entropy as the temperature rises, it is no longer displayed by materials above the Curie point.
FTP, name this phenomenon, a tendency to maintain spontaneous magnetization, often seen in cobalt and
iron.
ANSWER: Ferromagnetism
The existence of this property can be predicted using the Stoner criterion, and a material with this property
changes under torsion according to the Matteucci effect. One model of this phenomenon was solved in two
dimensions by Lars Onsanger and was generalized by Potts. One process in materials with this property
occurs in many small discontinuous steps, and results in Barkhausen noise. This property occurs below the
Curie point, and materials displaying it have a high positive susceptibility, and often retain their
magnetization in the absence of an external magnetic field, which is known as hysteresis. FTP name this
type of magnetism possessed by cobalt and nickel, as well as iron, its namesake.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
The permeability of substances exhibiting this is given by the Stoletov Curve while certain combinations of
copper, manganese and aluminium also exhibit this behavior. Only elements with partially filled electron
shells, such as Gadolinium and Dysprosium, exhibit this behavior. Below a critical temperature a substance
exhibiting this will undergo spontaneous magnetization, but above that critical temperature named for
Curie, thermal motion in a substance causes its magnetic dipoles to lose their alignment and the substance to
lose this property. For ten points name this "permanent" type of magnetism often compared with
paramagnetism and diamagnetism.
ANSWER: Ferromagnetism
A pioneering theorist in the study of these materials was Pierre-Ernest Weiss, though explaining them
required the understanding of exchange interactions in quantum theory. One phenomenon associated with
them can be measured in a Rowland (ROH-lund) ring, and these materials can be described by the spherical
or Ising ("icing") models. The aforementioned effect is often shown as an S-shaped loop and is called
hysteresis. These materials are comprised of regions with aligned moments that break down above the Curie
temperature and are called domains. With examples like cobalt, nickel, and its namesake element, name this
phenomenon contrasted with diamagnetism and paramagnetism.
ANSWER: ferromagnets [accept word forms, e.g. ferromagnetism or ferromagnetic; prompt on magnets or word forms thereof]
The Ising model deals with this behavior microscopically by considering electrons interacting only with
nearest neighbors in a lattice of spin states. Materials with this property exhibit a lag response with changes
in an applied field, a phenomenon called hysteresis. This property is characterized by the presence of
magnetic properties even after the removal of an external magnetic field, a behavior which ceases above the
Curie temperature. For 10 points name this type of magnetism exhibited by such metals as nickel, cobalt,
and its namesake, iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [accept word forms like ferromagnet, etc.; accept hysteresis until mentioned]
This property is present in elements above the horizontal axis in the Bethe-Slater curve, and it only
occurs in materials with one or more easy axes. Coercivity and remanence are characteristic
properties of materials with this property that increases in discrete steps as shown by the Barkhausen
effect. Owing to a (*) hysteresis loop, this property remains in a material even after an applied field is
removed, though it disappears when a material is raised above the Curie temperature. Bulk materials with
this property consist of domains of aligned spins. Cobalt, but not copper, possesses, for 10 points, what
form of permanent magnetism named after iron?
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [accept word forms; prompt on magnetism]
Materials exhibiting the "anti" version of this can interact with materials exhibiting this property via
exchange bias. This property occurs in regions that are separated by Bloch and Neel walls, and when
this property waxes or wanes, those domains change sizes and cause popping noises known as the
Barkhausen effect. The lag in this property is known as hysteresis, and this property occurs below the
Curie temperature. For 10 points, name this phenomenon exhibited by nickel, cobalt, and its namesake
material, iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism [or ferromagnetic; prompt on magnetism]
Materials with this property spontaneously form Bloch and Neel walls, and it this property may be attained
in minute steps through the Barkhausen effect. The measure of the field strength must be applied to a
material with this property to remove it is called coercitivity, while Lars Onsager solved the two
dimensional case of a model for this property, the Ising spin model. Materials displaying this property may
retain their magnetization in the abscence of an electric field due to hysterisis, and it occurs below the Curie
temperature. For ten points, name this mechanism by which certain metals, such as iron, form permanent
magnets.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
The transition to this behavior can be shown by a material having a line with a positive yintercept
on an Arrott plot. A particular material class showing this behavior undergoes a
martensitic phase transition and is shape-memory alloys. The product of the density of states at
the Fermi level with the exchange integral for it must be greater than one according to the Stoner
criterion. This property is shown by a gas of lithium atoms cooled to about 150 nanokelvin. It
causes jumps in a material's J vs H curve due to alignment within entire domains in the
Barkhausen effect. The susceptibility due to this property is equal to a constant over temperature
minus theta according to a law partly named for Weiss. For 10 points, name this kind of
magnetism that shows permanent magnetism by parallel alignment of domains.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism
This phenomenon causes a noise called the Barkhausen effect; that noise is the result of the rapid
shifting of domains. This phenomenon is mathematically described by the Ising model and is achieved
in materials that have small localized domains where the electrons all possess the same spin. The core
of a transformer is composed of a material possessing this property. This property disappears above
a certain point called the Curie temperature and is the result when an externally applied magnetic field
causes electrons to align in the same direction. For 10 points, name this form of magnetism so named for its
presence in iron.
ANSWER: ferromagnetism (accept word forms like "ferromagnetic materials", prompt on "magnetism")
The fact that this property emerges from interaction with regions separated by Neel or Bloch walls is
demonstrated by the Barkhausen effect. Lithium gas has been shown to exhibit this property at low
temperatures. A statistical model named for Ising describes the phase changes in this property. Hysteresis
allows this property to persist until an external effect, such as heat, is applied. For 10 points, name this
effect, which disappears completely above the Curie temperature, exhibited by substances such as cobalt
and iron.
ANSWER: Ferromagnetism
A formula linking PDEs to stochastic processes is named for this man and Mark Kac. He developed a
technique for parametrizing loop integrals, and with his thesis advisor, he names a time-symmetric theory of
electrodynamics. Awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics with Schwinger and Tomonaga for his work on
quantum electrodynamics, he developed the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics. Known for his
Lectures on Physics and the autobiographical Surely You're Joking, for 10 points, name this American
physicist whose namesake diagrams depict the interactions of elementary particles.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
This man names a theorem for calculating the derivative of an energy eigenvalue with respect to an arbitrary
parameter along with Hellmann. He completed a theory in which the propagator is proportional to the
complex exponential of the action along a trajectory. In addition to contributing to that path-integral
formulation of quantum mechanics, this man won the Nobel Prize with Schwinger and Tomonaga for
contributions to quantum electrodynamics. Photons are represented by wavy lines in a set of diagrams
named for him. For 10 points, name this American physicist known for his Lectures on Physics, along with
a book whose title asks whether he is joking.
ANSWER: Richard Philips Feynman
This man's lecture There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom is regarded as the birth of the field of
MEMS. His ratchet violates the second law of thermodynamics. Positrons are represented as electrons
moving backwards in time in diagrams introduced by this man. Along with Shin-Ichiro Tomonaga and
Julian Schwinger, he received the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work in quantum electrodynamics.
For 10 points, name this physicist best known for his amazingly clear Lectures on Physics given while a
professor at Caltech.
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
This man interspersed anecdotes with drum playing in his Safecracker Suite, and he took up drawing under
the pseudonym "Ofey." As a physicist he proposed the parton model of particle physics and studied the
superfluidity of supercooled liquid helium. He is most well known for completing the path integral
formulation of quantum mechanics, which later evolved into the discovery of his namesake diagrams,
pictorial bookkeeping schemes for representing the behavior of subatomic particles. For ten points, name
this American physicist who taught at Caltech and who won the 1965 Physics Nobel Prize for his work in
quantum electrodynamics.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
One of this man's innovations relies on the Green's function methods allowed by Wick's theorem. Along
with Smoluchowski, this man is credited with theorizing a device to extract work from Brownian motion,
his namesake ratchet. This man came up with a graphical representation of Moller scattering. He
piggybacked on the work of Dirac to complete the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics. For 10
points, name this physicist whose namesake diagrams depict the behavior of subatomic particles using
straight and squiggly lines.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
With Wheeler, this scientist names an absorber theory that resolves causality issues in time-symmetric
electromagnetism. With Hellmann, he names a theorem giving an expression for the derivative of an
eigenenergy with respect to a parameter, and he showed that Bose-Einstein condensation occurs in
superfluid liquid helium. He developed the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, and with
Schwinger or Tomonaga, this physicist was rewarded the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on
quantum electrodynamics. Straight lines represent fermions and wavy lines represent bosons in this man's
namesake diagrams depicting particle interactions. For 10 points, name this physicist, a longtime Caltech
professor well known for his lectures.
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
Together with Albert Hibbs, this scientist published a work describing his relativistic chessboard, and he
used what became as his namesake integral to improve on the work of Dirac. He worked with John Wheeler
to develop a time-independent model of electrodynamics, and much of his work used sum-over-paths
formulations based on mathematics developed by Mark Kac. This scientist often represented quantum
interactions by drawing two straight lines and a squiggly line in his namesake diagrams. Name this eccentric
physicist who shared the 1965 Nobel Prize with Schwinger and Tomonaga.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
This scientist argued that Millikan's oil drop experiment fudged the calculated values of the
elementary charge in an example of "Cargo Cult Science." He theorized quarks and gluons in his
parton model. This man postulated that the path of a quantum system can be calculated by
integrating the probabilities along all trajectories. He lends his name to a (*) graph which plots time on
the x-axis and space on the y-axis, where wavy lines represent force carriers. He revolutionized
electrodynamics with his path integral formulation and his namesake diagrams. For ten points, name this
Caltech physicist who often published humorous treatments of quantum mechanics.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
This man proposed a method of detecting gravitational waves by placing a bead on a stick and
allowing the back-and-forth motion of the bead to generate heat. One formalism developed by this
man stated that weighting each trajectory of a particle by the action and summing over all possible
trajectories gives the quantum (*) amplitude of a given process. With Schwinger and Tomonaga, this man
developed an extremely accurate theory which describes the electromagnetic force as due to photon
exchange; that theory is QED. He also names a construct that uses straight and squiggly lines to describe
particle decay and scattering. For 10 points, name this American theoretical physicist whose namesake
diagrams are used to show interactions between subatomic particles.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
Before quarks were proposed, this scientist proposed partons to analyze high-energy hadron
collisions. Using a formalism fully developed by this person, the quantum mechanical amplitude can
be found by integrating over all the possible paths with a weighting factor given by the classical
action, the so-called path integral formulation. Squiggly and straight lines can be used to show the
annihilation of an electron and positron to form a photon on his namesake (*) diagrams. This
physicist's undergraduate lectures at CalTech were packaged into his namesake Lectures on Physics. For 10
points, name this bongo drum enthusiast who shared a Nobel with Julian Schwinger for his work in
quantum electrodynamics and demonstrated the effects of cold on an O-ring after the Challenger disaster.
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
This person's Caltech lectures were the basis of his books Six Easy Pieces and Six Not So Easy Pieces.
This person worked with Murray Gell-Mann to explain the weak interaction, and he extended work
by Paul Dirac on path integrals. This person shared a Nobel Prize with Schwinger and Tomonaga for
his work on quantum electrodynamics, and much later he investigated the Space Shuttle Challenger
explosion. He included a space axis and a time axis and often showed two arrows meeting a squiggly
line in his namesake diagrams. Name this practical joker who wrote the autobiography What Do You
Care What Other People Think?.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
Using Weyl ordering in a formalism due to this scientist leads to the midpoint prescription. In
that formalism due to this physicist, the integral kernel, or propagator, of the time-evolution
operator is expressed as the sum over all possible paths with a weighting factor proportional to
the exponential of the action. That formalism is the path integral formulation. Like Julian
Schwinger, this American's work on the renormalization of quantum electrodynamics won him a
Nobel, and the arrow-containing-lines and squiggly lines that appear on his namesake diagrams
are iconic of particle physics. For 10 points, name this bongo drum enthusiast whose undergrad
lectures at CalTech were made into the three volume set Lectures on Physics.
ANSWER: Richard "Dick" Feynman
This man suggested writing a book on the head of a pin by directly manipulating individual atoms in his talk
"There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom". His eponymous ratchet violates the second law of
thermodynamics. He devised the path integral formulation, which he called a "sum over histories," that
helped him with Schwinger and Tomonaga renormalize quantum electrodynamics. Using another formalism
named for him, one can illustrate the interactions of charged particles using force-carrying photons. For 10
points, name this American physicist known for his lectures on physics and his namesake diagrams.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
In one work, this man posed the question "Why cannot we write the entire 24 volumes of the
Encyclopedia Britannica on the head of a pin?" That work by this scientist is titled "There's Plenty
of Room at the Bottom" and discusses the possibility of manipulating individual electrons, which
gave rise to the field of nanotechnology. Two of this scientist's works are subtitled for the
"Adventures of a Curious Character." This scientist's (*) undergraduate lectures form the basis for a
three volume set of books, and he wrote an autobiography whose name begins with the words "Surely,
You-re Joking." For 10 points, the behavior of subatomic particles is shown on what Caltech physicist's
namesake diagrams?
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
Shortly after Yuri Manin [MAH-neen] wrote Computable and Uncomputable, this scientist gave a talk
titled "Simulating Physics with Computers" that discussed building a quantum computer. Based on work
with John Archibald Wheeler, this scientist developed the use of path integrals. Freeman Dyson showed that
this person's work on quantum electrodynamics was equivalent to work by Tomonaga and Schwinger
[SHWEENG-er]. Name this person who used arrows and wavy lines to demonstrate quantum interactions in
his namesake diagrams.
ANSWER: Richard Feynman
Faddeev-Popov ghosts are modifications designed to prevent overcounting in a computational technique
named for this man. He also gives his name to a representation of the Dirac equation using discrete
timesteps on a checkboard and Dirac fields are studied using his slash notation. A theory positing time
symmetry in the solutions to the electromagnetic field equations is named for him and his advisor, Wheele
and he devised a path integral formulation of quantum mechanics. For 10 points, name this Caltech
physicist, the namesake of a diagram used to model scattering experiments, who surely was joking.
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
An interpretation of electrodynamics that starts from requiring that solutions to the field equations
be time-inversion symmetric is named for this physicist and for John Wheeler. Divergences in an
approach to quantum mechanics he developed were resolved by a method of renormalization he
developed with Schwinger and Tomonaga. He predated the discovery of quarks and gluons in his (*)
parton model. One construct named for this physicist provides a way to rewrite a Dyson series and depicts
photons as wavy lines. For 10 points, name this physicist responsible in large part for the path integral
formulation of quantum mechanics and for a graphical representation of particle interactions, his namesake
diagrams.
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
Mark Kac improved upon a formula developed by this man to derive a solution to the heat equation with a
cooling term. Along with Wheeler, he names an interpretation of electrodynamics based on time-inversion
symmetry. With Hans Bethe, he developed a formula to calculate the yield of a fission bomb. In 1965 he
received a Nobel prize along with Schwinger and Tomonaga for his work in quantum electrodynamics, and
he developed the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics. His lectures at Caltech were compiled
into a physics textbook. For 10 points, name this American physicist whose namesake diagrams depict the
interactions of elementary particles.
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
This physicist proposed the parton (PAR-tawn) model of hadron collisions. His namesake "point"
occurs at the 762nd digit of pi. Along with Schwinger and Tomonaga, he won the Nobel Prize for
developing (*) quantum electrodynamics, or QED. He also explained why the Challenger exploded and
developed some namesake diagrams to represent particle interactions in quantum field theory. For 10
points, name this Caltech physicist who enjoyed playing the bongos.
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
Grassmann numbers are used to allow one of this man's formulations to represent fermionic fields, and he
developed a quantum mechanical explanation of Landau's theory of superfluidity. This man names a time
symmetric theory of electrodynamics with Wheeler, and along with Shinichiro Tomonaga and Julian
Schwinger, this man was awarded the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work in quantum
electrodynamics. This man's namesake diagrams show particle interaction, and he gave a famous series of
lectures that were compiled into a three volume set. For 10 points, name this physicist and CalTech
professor who was quite the bongo player.
ANSWER: Richard P. Feynman
During the Manhattan Project, this physicist along with Hans Bethe created equations to calculate
the yield of a nuclear bomb. This man provided a quantum explanation for Landau's theory of
superfluidity. While working on the Rogers Commission investigating the (+) Challenger explosion,
this man demonstrated the fragility of the O-rings by dunking one into a cup of ice water. This man
won the Nobel prize along with Tomonaga and Schwinger for his work on (*) quantum
electrodynamics. For 10 points, what Cal Tech physicist is most famous for his colorful lifestyle chronicled
in his autobiography whose title asks "Surely You-re Joking?"
ANSWER: Richard Phillips Feynman
Internal massless components of these objects are associated with a factor proportional to i divided by the
momentum q squared, while coupling constants equal to the square root of 4 pi times the fine structure
constant are introduced for each of these objects- vertices. Processes are called OZI suppressed and have
much shorter lifetimes if these objects can be "cut" by touching only gluons. Antisymmetrization results in
subtraction between matrix elements when two of these objects differ by the exchange of identical fermions.
Arrows moving opposite the direction of time in these objects represent antiparticles, while helices denote
gluons and waves indicate photons. For 10 points, name these diagrams used to model particle interactions,
named for a Caltech physicist.
ANSWER: Feynman diagrams
Path-independent types of these mathematical constructs are known as conservative, while the Lorentz force
law contains the sum of two of these. Those two examples are each integrated in the two flux laws named
for Gauss and are represented by the letters B and E. A common representation of these shows direction and
involves lines whose frequencies represent strength. FTP, name these regions in which points are affected
by forces with electric, magnetic and gravitational varieties.
ANSWER: Force Fields [Accept Vector Fields]
In the Klein-Nishina formula, the square of this value is multiplied by one half the square of the
Compton radius and a polynomial involving Cos theta and ratios of photon energies. The Rydberg
constant is equal to the square of this value multiplied by the mass of the electron times c, all divided
by four pi h-bar, and the Lamb shift is proportional to the fifth power of this quantity. One method
of calculating this quantity involves setting the Lande (*) g-factor equal to a polynomial in this value,
while applying perturbation theory to QED results in power series in terms of this quantity, which was
originally posited as the ratio of the velocity of an electron in the Bohr model to the speed of light. At high
energies this value would diverge at the Landau pole. Also defined as e squared over h bar c, for 10 points,
name this coupling constant for the electromagnetic force, which Arthur Eddington posited to be equal to
exactly one over 137.
ANSWER: Fine Structure constant
Because this quantity is very small, the Dyson series is accurate in the billionths after two terms.
Dividing this quantity by two pi gives the one-loop correction to the electron's magnetic dipole
moment. At zero angular momentum, the energy shift between the 2-S-one-half and 2-P-one-half
levels of the hydrogen atom caused by vacuum coupling is proportional to the fifth power of this
quantity. This quantity is equal to the ratio of the speed of the electron in the relativistic Bohr model
to the speed of light. Around the 10 to the 283 kilo-electron-volt scale, this quantity (*) diverges
according to QED. This quantity, which is the coupling constant for the electromagnetic interaction, blows
up at the Landau pole, was introduced by Arnold Sommerfeld and is equal to approximately one over 137.
For 10 points, name this constant symbolized alpha.
ANSWER: fine-structure constant [or alpha before mentioned]
In solid-state physics, this constant is sometimes written as one-quarter the product of the impedance
of free space and the conductance quantum. The first order special-relativistic perturbation to the 1s
electron energy in the hydrogen atom is proportional to the square of this constant, and the second
order perturbation is proportional to its fourth power. This constant can be written as the ratio of
the (*) Bohr atom's electron velocity to the speed of light. It is the square of the ratio of the electron charge
to the Planck charge, and hence is the fundamental coupling constant characterizing the strength of the
electromagnetic interaction. For 10 points, name this physical constant, which is often denoted with the
Greek letter alpha, and whose reciprocal is close to 137.
ANSWER: fine structure constant
In an exact version of quantum electrodynamics, it would diverge at the Landau pole, and in the theory of
the renormalization group its value grows logarithmically with the energy scale. The rate of neutron capture
in Samarium 149 in the Oklo natural nuclear reactor can be used to compare its value between today and
1.5 billion years ago. Any change might also be detected by looking at hyperfine transitions in hydrogen
emission lines from the early universe. For 10 points, name this constant, the square of the ratio of the
elementary charge to the Planck charge, which represents the strength of the interactions between electrons
and photons and is approximately equal to 1/137.
ANSWER: fine-structure constant
The Oklo phenomenon, which occurred in Gabon, provides a strict constraint on the time variability
of this number. John Barrow and Frank Tipler invoke the anthropic principle to explain that if the
value of this constant were to change, carbon-based life would no longer be viable. Measurement of
the (*) Lande g-factor in a quantum cyclotron gives the most precise value of this quantity, whose square is
the ratio between the electron rest mass and the Hartree energy. It is also the ratio between the electron
velocity and the speed of light and was introduced by Sommerfeld to improve the Bohr model. For 10
points, name this dimensionless quantity with value 1/137.
ANSWER: fine-structure constant [prompt on 1/137 until mentioned]
The most precise measurement for this quantity has come from the magnetic moment of the electron. For an
electromagnetic interaction with n vertices, the amplitude for the interaction is proportional to this constant
to the nth power. The square of this number is the ratio of the Hartree energy to the rest mass of the
electron, and it is the ratio of the classical velocity in the ground state of the Hydrogen atom to the speed of
light. The probability of a mechanism of an electromagnetic interaction involving n virtual photons is
proportional to this constant to the 2n power, which in Quantum Electrodynamics indicates that this is the
coupling constant for electromagnetic interactions. For 10 points, name this dimensionless constant in
quantum mechanics, famously miscalculated by a numerological argument by Eddington, which is
approximately one over 137.
ANSWER: Fine Structure Constant
One of these entities can be restated in an equation with the terms del-squared T and q-triple-prime,
while another states the effect of an object whose resultant force is zero. Yet another one of these entities
overrules two "lower" laws, and mandates that a robot may not injure a human. For ten points, name this
numbered law that describes the conservation of energy in thermodynamics and the law of inertia in
physics.
ANSWER: first laws (accept laws of thermodynamics before "resultant force")
With respect to this process, a "dollar" is the separation between states of prompt and delayed
criticality. Tin appears to be the lightest element in which this process can be induced by gamma
rays, and this process is spontaneous if the ratio Z squared over A is greater than or equal to fortyfive. This process can be modeled by the six- or four-factor formula, both of which gives the effective
(*) neutron multiplication factor. Reactors for this process are "poisoned" by the presence of elements like
xenon. This process, which occurs in nuclei heavier than nickel-62, releases an amount of energy equal to
the difference of product minus reactant binding energy. For 10 points, name this process by which a
nucleus is split apart, often used on uranium-235.
ANSWER: nuclear fission [accept chain reaction before "neutron"; prompt thereafter]
The right part of a B-vs-A curve, which is downwards sloping, is used to find the yield of this
process by finding the y-differential. A naturally occurring instance of this process was discovered by
Francis Perrin at Oklo in Gabon. Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch proposed that results of Otto Hahn
and Fritz Strassman were a result of this process. This process was successfully initiated by the
Chicago (*) Pile-1, which was constructed partially of graphite blocks, designed by Enrico Fermi and used
cadmium control rods. Leo Szilard was the first to propose a chain reaction involving this process, and
beryllium is commonly used as a neutron source for this process. For 10 points, name this process in which
the nucleus of an atom is split into smaller parts.
ANSWER: nuclear fission [prompt on self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction]
Material buckling must be equal to geometric buckling for this process to occur at a steady state. The
product of thermal utilization factor and three other factors gives K, the effective neutron multiplication
factor, which must be greater than one for this process to occur. This process may be halted by iodine pits
or poisoning with xenon. More material is produced than consumed by this process in breeder reactors. It is
sustained when a material has a supercritical mass, and it can occur when a neutron is absorbed by
plutonium-239 or uranium-235. For 10 points, name this energy-releasing reaction in which the nucleus of a
particle is split into smaller parts, used in atom bombs.
ANSWER: nuclear fission [do not accept "fusion"]
The yield curve for this process exhibits a characteristic double-hump shape, the modeling of which was an
early success for the liquid drop model. The ratio of the cross-section for this process to that for absorption
of the particles that mediate it times the mean number of mediator particles created by it is an important
factor governing the stability of the rate of this process and is known as the reproduction. The critical mass
is the minimum amount of material required to undergo this process in a self-sustaining nuclear reactor. For
10 points, name this physical process in which large nuclei break apart, exploited by nuclear power plants to
create energy.
ANSWER: neutron-mediated nuclear fission
One measurement associated with this process is calculated through use of the fudge factor. The
energy associated with this process can be calculated by subtracting the Q values of the reactants
from those of the products. It occurs when Coulombic repulsive forces overcome the strong force.
One result of this process is the emission of "prompt" and "delayed" (*) neutrons. This process occurs
most frequently when A is greater than 220. It causes a chain reaction when the amount of substrate is
above the critical mass. For ten points, name this process in which an unstable nucleus is split, which often
occurs to isotopes of uranium in nuclear reactors.
ANSWER: nuclear fission (do not accept fusion)
The ternary form of this process can produce three positively charged fragments that range from a proton to
an argon atom. The thermal utilization factor is one of four factors in an equation governing this process,
which can be induced by gamma rays. Beryllium is often used as a neutron reflector to reduce this process's
necessary supercritical mass. This process occurs in breeder reactors, many of which use uranium-235 to
start a chain reaction. For 10 points, name this process in which large nuclei break down into smaller ones,
releasing energy and neutrons.
ANSWER: nuclear fission [prompt on nuclear chain reaction; or on nuclear reaction; do not accept "fusion"]
Boiling water reactors are heated up by energy released from this process, and the products of breeder
reactors are capable of undergoing this process. The occurrence of this process yields a neutron, which can
continue to take part in it, in the "chain reaction" named for this process. The products of this process are
Rubidium 90 and Cesium 143 when it is applied to Uranium 235. For 10 points, name this process by which
atomic nucelii ["nucli-eye"] split into two, which was used in the atomic bombs during World War II.
ANSWER: nuclear fission [do not prompt on or accept nuclear fusion]
This phenomenon will occur spontaneously when Z squared over A is greater than 49, according to the
semi-empirical mass formula. That occurs when electrostatic repulsion overcomes the attractive strong
force. In this phenomenon, delayed neutrons are released from daughter nuclides through beta decay.
Above the critical mass, this process occurs as a chain reaction, necessitating the use of control rods. For 10
points, name this process used in most nuclear reactors, in which an atom is split.
ANSWER: nuclear fission [do not accept "fusion"]
This process is modeled in an equation that uses the four factors, including thermal utilization and
resonance escape velocity. The number of particles required to sustain this process is the "effective neutron
multiplication factor," k. Beryllium is used as a neutron reflector to reduce this phenomenon's necessary
supercritical mass. Breeder reactors facilitate this process, which can sustain itself in a "chain reaction." For
10 points, name this process in which large atomic nuclei break down into smaller parts, which was used in
the atomic bombs dropped on Japan.
ANSWER: nuclear fission [prompt on nuclear chain reaction; do not accept "nuclear fusion" or "fusion"]
The four factor formula is used to gauge the sustainability of this process in an infinite medium, and this
process occurred underground at Oklo, Gabon, around two billion years ago. In that case, water seeping
through the ore slowed down neutrons, making them more likely to be absorbed, but now beryllium is often
used as a neutron reflector in order to lower the necessary supercritical mass. FTP, name this physical
process where the nucleus of a large atom is split into two pieces by a neutron, releasing more neutrons and
sometimes causing a chain reaction.
ANSWER: nuclear fission (do not accept fusion)
This process occurred naturally at Oklo, Gabon around two billion years ago, and it was first
explained by Lise Meitner after experiments performed by Otto Hahn. The six-factor formula gives
the effective neutron multiplication factor for one of these processes, which equals one when these
reactions are self-sustaining, or (*) "critical". It is sped up by neutron reflectors like beryllium and
moderated by graphite or water, and this reaction's rate is limited by control rods. Performed unknowingly
by Enrico Fermi in 1934 and capable of being sustained only by isotopes of plutonium and uranium, for 10
points, what type of nuclear reaction involves large atoms splitting into smaller ones?
ANSWER: nuclear fission [prompt on nuclear reactions]
One model for the structure of this astronomical action is based on the Hall effect and assumes that outflow
is driven by dispersive waves to account for the Petschek shock structure. That model of this one-word
action was an update to the Sweet-Parker model. This kind of action and an accompanying storm caused
the breakdown of many instruments during the so-called Bastille Day Event. This kind of action gives its
name to a class of stellar objects such as UV Ceti and Barnard's Star. This astronomical action is thought to
be caused by the breaking up and refusing of field lines via magnetic reconnection. This astronomical action
may be followed by a coronal mass ejection. For 10 points, identify this action that names a class of
variable stars whose brightness increase suddenly, which also names a sudden increase in brightness of the
Sun.
ANSWER: flares or flaring [accept solar flares and flare stars, etc.; prompt on "coronal mass ejections" or "CMEs" before mention; prompt on "magnetic reconnection" until mention]
The main issue underlying this property was first pointed out by Dicke and Peebles, who suggested that an
explanation is necessary to figure out why initial gravitational and kinetic energies were approximately
equal, as that implies a zero-energy system. A conundrum named for this property is centered around the
fact that the difference in a variable often represented by omega grows by time raised to the 2/3 power in
the FLRW model. This property is possessed by a certain object because the ratio of the actual density to
critical density is one, meaning that the equation of state parameter is also one. Along with the monopole
and horizon problems, this property gives its name to a problem solved by a model of cosmic inflation.
Experiments by WMAP suggest that our universe assumes this topology to one part in 10 to the 50. For 10
points, identify this spatial topology characterized by zero curvature.
ANSWER: flatness
When the Knudsen number in one of these substances is much less than 1, the continuum hypothesis is a
valid assumption. MHD is the study of electrically-charged ones. Kolmogorov scales are functions of the
rate at which kinetic energy associated with eddies in them is dissipated. Transverse waves cannot
propagate through these substances. The Reynolds number describes the ratio of inertial and viscous forces
in them, and they are modeled by the Navier-Stokes equations. Inviscid ones move faster when their
pressure drops, according to Bernoulli's principle. For 10 points, name these substances which flow,
including plasmas, liquids, and gases.
ANSWER: fluids [prompt on "liquids" or "gases" or "plasmas"]
In two-dimensional Poseuille flow, the field describing this quantity takes on a parabolic profile. For a
Newtonian fluid, the shear stress is given by the dynamic viscosity times the gradient in this quantity.
When the curl of the field representing this quantity is zero, a fluid is called irrotational; that curl is called
the voriticity. The no-slip condition defines where this quantity is zero, and the product of this quantity
with the characteristic length and the density, divided by viscosity, yields the Reynolds number. In
Bernoulli's equation, the square of this quantity balances the pressure integral. For 10 points, identify this
quantity which according to Bernoulli's equation, causes a pressure drop in a fluid when it increases, and
whose square times the mass gives the kinetic energy of a fluid flow.
ANSWER: fluid velocity
The mass continuity equation states that the divergence of this quantity times the density is the negative of
the time derivative of the density. This quantity is equal to the curl of the stream function. When its
divergence is zero, the flow is incompressible, but when this quantity's curl is zero, irrotational flow results.
Along with the characteristic length and the density, it is found in the numerator of the Reynolds number,
and if its time derivative is zero, the flow is steady. The cross-sectional area times this quantity is the
volumetric flow rate. For 10 points, name this quantity which represents how quickly particles in a fluid are
moving, the time derivative of position.
ANSWER: fluid velocity [accept flow velocity]
One technique employs this phenomenon to determine the shape of macromolecules by measuring the
change in polarization. This phenomenon leads to resonance energy transfer between closely
separated groups in a lab technique to determine if two proteins naturally interact. This phenomenon
in proteins can be quenched by glutamate or aspartate protons and is mostly exhibited by tryptophan
residues. Membrane fluidity may be quantified in a technique called (*) FRAP that measures this
phenomenon's resistance to photobleaching. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which light is
absorbed at one wavelength and released at another, a process that is quicker than phosphorescence and
which can cause objects to glow.
ANSWER: fluorescence [prompt on luminescence; do not accept "phosphorescence," as most of the early clues rule that out]
This process cannot occur after intersystem crossing because it is spin-allowed, and the Stern-Volmer
relationship maps its disappearance. The distance between two molecules with this property is
measured based on the inverse-sixth power dependence of this process's namesake (*) resonance
energy transfer to distance. The lowest energy transition in a molecule exhibiting this property is typically
pi to pi-star. This process occurs when a molecule absorbs a photon, then relaxes in a singlet to singlet
transition yielding a photon of larger wavelength than the incident photon. For 10 points, name this form of
luminescence contrasted with phosphorescence.
ANSWER: fluorescence [accept word forms such as fluorescent, prompt on "luminescence"]
Because this effect usually produces low-intensity signals, an apparatus consisting of serial dynodes which
amplify incoming signals are used in this type of spectroscopy. In one technique, resonant transfer of energy
via this effect induces a signal from a nearby chromophore. It is used along with flow cytometry to sort cells
in one technique, while the former technique is used to study protein-protein interactions and is called
FRET. This effect occurs due to relaxation from an excited state without going through a triplet state. For
10 points, identify this effect in which a substance emits light of a longer wavelength than the one it
absorbs, which only lasts for short durations as opposed to phosphorescence.
ANSWER: fluorescence
Two-photon excitation microscopy takes advantage of this phenomenon to observe below the surface of
living tissue. A dark-ground condenser makes it easier to observe this effect, and, similar to a
superconducting magnet, this property is decreased by Forster resonance energy transfer in a process called
quenching. The Franck-Condon principle describes absorption and this type of photoluminescence that
immediately follows. Mercury vapor often is used in lamps that use this to convert ultraviolet light into
visible light, and this is characterized by emitted photons with less energy than the absorbed photons. Name
this process that stops quickly when incident radiation is stopped, often contrasted with phosphorescence.
ANSWER: fluorescence [accept word forms; prompt on photoluminescence]
For an ideal gas, this quantity varies directly with the square root of temperature when volume is held
constant and inversely with the square root of temperature when pressure is held constant. For a
coil of wire, the derivative of this type of quantity with time equals the opposite of electromotive force
divided by the number of coils. This quantity is typically represented by an upper-case Greek phi. The
magnetic type is measured in webers, and this quantity is sometimes considered a rate of diffusion. Name
this quantity that represents flow per unit area
ANSWER: flux
This quantity for the energy of an electromagnetic field is given by the Poynting
vector. It is equal and opposite to the rate of change of fluid density, and for an
electric field, this quantity can be calculated as the surface integral of E dot dA. This
quantity's magnetic variety is measured in webers, and it is proportional to the
number of magnetic field lines passing through a given surface. For 10 points, name
this type of quantity, also with common heat and luminous types, that generally
measures the amount of substance passing through an area per unit time.
ANSWER: flux
A quantity of this name for neutrons is multiplied by the macroscopic fission cross-section to give the
fission reaction rate in a nuclear reactor. In a type-II superconductor, the usual version of this quantity is
quantized for the H field when the applied field is between two critical values; the inverse of that quantum
is the Josephson constant. For electromagnetic energy, this quantity is represented by the Poynting vector.
Fick's first law states that this value for a given quantity is equal on net to minus the diffusion constant
times the gradient of that quantity. For the electric field, this quantity through a closed surface is
proportional to the enclosed charge according to Gauss's Law. For 10 points, name this quantity, equal to
the rate at which some physical quantity passes through a location per unit area.
ANSWER: flux [accept more specific answers such as neutron flux, electric flux, magnetic flux, etc.]
The Poynting vector represents the density of the energy form of this value. Fourier's (fur-yay-z)
law sets the density of this quantity for heat equal to thermal conductivity times the temperature
gradient. The divergence theorem sets the surface integral of this quantity equal to the volume integral
of divergence. One of Gauss's laws sets one form of this value equal to charge over permittivity.
Faraday's law sets electromotive force equal to the opposite of the time derivative of the magnetic
type of this quantity, which equals the magnetic field strength times area and is measured in webers.
Name this measurement of the rate of flow.
ANSWER: flux
The quantization of this quantity was first demonstrated by the Little-Parks effect, and
Abrikosov vortices are sometimes named for the fact that they contain a quantum of this quantity.
The inverse of the quantum of this quantity is equal to the Josephson constant. This quantity is equal
to the line integral of the vector potential around a boundary. Type II superconductors have the
ability to pin lines of this quantity. The negative time derivative of this quantity is equal to the
induced (*) emf according to Faraday's Law, and this quantity can be given as the dot product of the
magnetic field with the surface area. For 10 points, name this quantity which gives the amount of magnetic
field passing through a given area.
ANSWER: magnetic flux [or electromagnetic flux]
The value of this quantity in an Abrikosov vortex is the winding number times hc over 2 e. In
approximations to solar plasma, this quantity moves with material according to the freezing-in theorem. In
the generalized form of London's second equation, a quantity with units equivalent to this is divided by two
pi. This quantity is related to charge by a memristor. This entity is quantized in units of "2 n pi h-bar c over
e" within a superconductor. The rate of change in this quantity in time is proportional to induced emf by
Faraday's law of induction. This is the integral of B over a surface. It is measured in webers. For 10 points,
name this quantity that is proportional to the number of magnetic field lines running through a surface.
ANSWER: magnetic flux
For a charged particle gyrating around a guiding center, this quantity is the third adiabatic
invariant. It is quantized in units of Planck's constant over twice the electron charge. In a perfectly
conducting fluid, the time derivative of this quantity is zero according to Alfven's theorem. This
quantity's namesake linkage is related to the electric charge in a memristor. A superconductor can be
made to levitate via (*) "pinning" of this quantity. The time derivative of this quantity through a closed
loop is equal to the induced emf by Faraday's Law. This quantity is zero in the absence of monopoles by
Gauss's Law of magnetism. For 10 points, the SI unit Weber is used to measure what quantity, the surface
integral of the magnetic field?
ANSWER: magnetic flux [prompt on "flux," prompt on "phi" or "phi-sub-b," do NOT accept or prompt on "magnetic flux density" or "magnetic field"]
In ancient times, this star was the Watcher of the South as marking the winter solstice, although now it
culminates at the end of August. This star is surrounded by a large disk of debris and dust, which
astronomers believe is a protoplanetary accretion disk, although unlike other similar disks, its center is
offset 15 AUs. TW Piscis Austrini has been supposed as a companion to this larger star. Astronomers
recently discovered an extrasolar planet orbiting this star, the first ever to be seen using visible light. For 10
points, name this star, the brightest in the constellation Piscis Austrinus, whose name comes from the Arabic
for "mouth of the whale."
ANSWER: Fomalhaut [accept Alpha Piscis Austrini]
They are experienced between two plates in the Casimir effect, and one form is responsible for the
breakdown of nucleons into hadrons and leptons. Perturbation theory was applied to the effect of one of
these to predict the orbits of the planets, while one class of them only allows for the inter-conversion of
energy between its kinetic and potential forms. Kaluza-Klein theory suggests that all of them fictitious,
though there is more consensus that the centrifugal variety qualifies as such. Occurring in tension, friction,
and normal varieties as well as strong and weak forms is FTP, this concept in physics that causes
acceleration, examples of which include gravity.
ANSWER: forces
This quantity can be described as the time derivative of linear momentum. These entities are divided
into categories based on whether they can be associated with a potential energy; those categories are
conservative and nonconservative. The rotational analogue of this quantity is torque. Friction and drag are
types of this, which is equal to the product of mass and acceleration by Newton's second law. For 10
points, name this concept, the ability to change the motion of an object.
ANSWER: force
For a wire suspended in a magnetic field, the magnitude of this quantity is equal to the magnitude of
the current times the length times the field strength, and when a charge is in an electric field, this
quantity is the product of the charge and the field strength. This quantity is generally equal to the
derivative of momentum with respect to time. This quantity is proportional to (*) displacement in a
spring by Hooke's Law and, in the case of its electromagnetism, varies inversely with distance squared. The
"normal" type of this always acts perpendicularly to an inclined plane an object rests on. For ten points,
what is this vector quantity from physics, which is equal to mass times acceleration and is often measured in
Newtons?
ANSWER: force
In a fluid, this quantity equals the opposite of the pressure gradient divided by volume, and one unit of this
is the poundal. Free body diagrams are sometimes named for this quantity, and one type of this is caused by
the exchange of W and Z bosons. It is integrated with respect to time to find impulse, or with respect to
distance to find work, and it equals the derivative of momentum with respect to time. Newton's first law
describes what happens when this has a net value of zero, and Newton's third law states that one of these
always accompanies an opposite one. Name this vector quantity that can be measured in dynes or Newtons.
ANSWER: force
Meson exchange is used to describe one type of these, named for Yukawa, which has a negative
exponential relationship with respect to r. The one attributable to an electric field and magnetic field
acting on a charge is named for Lorentz. They can be classified as conservative or nonconservative. Work
is equal to the integral of this quantity with respect to position, and it is equal to the time derivative of
momentum. For 10 points, identify this vector, which is the product of mass and acceleration according
to Newton's second law.
ANSWER: force [accept potential until "acting on a charge" is read]
The value of a specific type of this quantity in a rotating reference frame is equal to the cross product of v
and -2m times omega. This quantity's third and fourth derivatives are known as "snatch" and "shake",
respectively. This quantity is equal to k times the absolute value of the product of two point charges divided
by the square of their distance in a law named for Coulomb. With units of kilogram meters per seconds
squared, also known as newtons, for ten points, name these vector quantities which are always found in
equal and opposite pairs according to Newton's Third Law.
ANSWER: forces
This concept was first formalized by Archimedes and Aristotle later reformed it in terms of his four basic
elements. Einstein showed that this quantity is directly related to the Lorentz facor. The electric potential of
a battery is often given as the electromotive one of these. Faraday formalized that gravity, magnatism, and
electricity all had lines of these. For 10 points, name this quantity in physics often expressed as mass times
accelertion.
ANSWER: forces
An electric field at a point is equal to this divided by charge. An inverse square law is used to describe
one type of this in a law named for Coulomb and in another discovered by Newton. Work is equal to this
over a distance. Torque is equal to the crossproduct of the displacement vector and this. All of these
associated with an object are shown in a free body diagram. For 10 points, name this concept that is equal
to mass times acceleration.
ANSWER: force
In Minkowski space, this quantity equals the rate of change above the four-momentum vector with
respect to proper time. The total amount of this quantity imparted on a charged particle by both the
magnetic and electric fields is named for Lorentz. This quantity is equal to the time derivative of the body's
momentum by Newton's Second Law. Work is equal to this quantity times distance. For 10 points, name
this vector quantity measured in newtons, which equals mass times acceleration.
ANSWER: force [or net force]
In a toy Yang-Mills theory of this dimension, the computation of scattering amplitudes is simplified by the
positive Grassmanian, also known as the amplituhedron. The Higgs field has this many components, all but
one of which are "eaten" by gauge bosons, manifesting as longitudinal polarization components. Relatedly,
the electroweak interaction also features this many gauge bosons. Particle number is a natural variable for
this many standard thermodynamic potentials. For a uniform rod, the moment of inertia about one end
exceeds the moment about its center by this factor. This is the dimension of the vectors acted on by Lorentz
transforms in special relativity, whose setting of Minkowski spacetime has this many dimensions. For 10
points, name this number, the number of fundamental forces.
ANSWER: four [or word forms; accept N = 4; accept four-vector]
A useful technique named for this man exploits the orthogonality of trigonometric functions and is
used to reduce integrals of such functions to the Kronecker delta function, this man's 'trick-. A
modulus named after this man is defined as the ratio of the rate of heat conduction and the rate of
heat energy storage. When analyzing a function via a method he names, one often encounters (*)
discontinuities known as the Gibbs phenomenon. Known for creating a transform used to go from the time
to frequency domain, for 10 points, identify this 19th century physicist whose eponymous series can express
any periodic function as a linear combination of sines and cosines.
ANSWER: Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier
Bochner's theorem states that every positive definite function can be written as this operation acting on a
positive finite Borel measure, and the Hermite functions form a complete orthonormal system of
eigenfunctions for this operation. Plancherel's theorem relates the integrals of the squares of a function and
this operation acting on that function. The discrete version of this which is computed using the CooleyTukey algorithm is the "fast" form of this operation, and can be written as the integral over the real line of
the argument function times e to the negative i times xi times t. For 10 points, identify this operation that
transforms the time domain into the frequency domain and is denoted by a hat or a curly F.
ANSWER: Fourier transform
A microscopic mechanism that causes this phenomenon is called microvoid coalescence, and
in one regime, the strain energy release rate caused by this process is equal to the J integral. The
"conchoidal" type of this phenomenon begins at a swelling called the "bulb of percussion".
Considering the surface-energy increase caused by this process leads to a derivation of Griffiths-
criterion for it. This phenomenon occurs in three different modes: opening, in-plane, and out-ofplane.
This phenomenon is marked by an X on the end of a stress-strain curve, and it happens
more easily in brittle materials than ductile materials. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which an applied stress causes a material to break in two.
ANSWER: fracture [or cracking]
This phenomenon is caused by the finite outward propagation velocity of gravitons in conjunction
with the downward acceleration of virtual fermions governed by graviton flux in the quantum
vacumm. It causes the orbital precession of X-rays emitted from gases due to the (*) graivtomagnetic
forces it produces within the ergosphere of Kerr black holes, and it is also known as the Lense-Thirring
effect. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a rotating massive object perturbs the space-time of
an orbiting body.
ANSWER: frame dragging
The paper describing this experiment noted that its findings were in agreement with recent previous
research done by R.W. Wood, while an improved version of this experiment was performed three years
later by Davis and Goucher. The experimental apparatus was enclosed within a heated paraffin bath, while
part of the apparatus consisted of a heated platinum wire, and a short distance away was a platinum
mesh. Current was measured as a function of voltage, and it was found that the current would decrease
suddenly at intervals of 4.9 volts, which was due to inelastic collisions between the electrons and mercury
vapor atoms. FTP, name this 1914 experiment that showed that energy levels in atoms are quantized, named
after two Germans who won the 1925 Nobel prize.
ANSWER: Franck-Hertz experiment (accept Hertz-Franck)
This man was one of the first to chart the course and temperature of the Gulf Stream. He was the first
person to assign positive and negative charges to electricity, which he called "vitreous" (VIH-tree-us) and
"resinous" (REH-sih-nus) fluid. He also showed that the charge in a Leyden jar was stored in the glass and
not in the water. For 10 points, name this Founding Father and inventor of the lightning rod who is said to
have shown the electrical nature of lightning by flying a kite in a storm.
ANSWER: Benjamin Franklin
This man, along with his cousin Timothy Folger, was the first to chart the Gulf Stream, which he
gave its name. Along with John Hadley, this scientist conducted experiments in Cambridge that
demonstrated the principle of evaporative (+) cooling. This scientist was the first to show the
conservation of charge, and it is because of him that we use the terms "positive" and "negative" to
describe charge. Georg Richmann was killed attempting to repeat an experiment in which this man
attempted to show that vitreous and resinous (*) electricity were the same. For 10 points, name this
inventor of the lightning rod and conductor of a kite experiment.
ANSWER: Benjamin Franklin
Details of this experiment were given to Peter Collinson and Joseph Priestley to publish. This
experiment's central apparatus was connected to a Leyden jar. The designer of this experiment felt
nothing when he grasped a (+) silk ribbon. Assisted by his son William, this experiment's designer
kept one end of a string dry to avoid certain death and attached a bronze (*) key to a flying object. For
10 points, name this experiment in which Benjamin Franklin proved that lightning consisted of electricity.
ANSWER: Benjamin Franklin's kite experiment [or equivalents]
Carson's rule describes the bandwidth that contains 98 percent of the power of a signal transmitted
by the modulation of this quantity; such signals may be decoded by a Foster-Seeley discriminator.
Bode plots have this quantity on the x axis plotted against magnitude and phase. An upper bound for
this quantity to prevent a folding phenomenon called the aliasing problem is named for (*) Nyquist.
Amplitude is inversely proportional to this quantity in pink noise, and the amplification of amplitude for
certain values of this quantity is called resonance. This quantity, multiplied by two pi and divided by
velocity, gives the wavenumber. For 10 points, name this quantity, which for light is equal to c over the
wavelength.
ANSWER: frequency
The time domain is replaced by this quantity's domain in periodic functions that go through a Fourier
(FOR-ee-air) transform. This quantity decreases due to redshift because of the Doppler effect. When
objects are excited at their natural value of this quantity, a buildup of large vibration amplitude known as
resonance occurs. This quantity equals a wave's phase velocity divided by its wavelength. For 10 points,
name this quantity measured in hertz.
ANSWER: frequency
In an AC circuit, inductive reactance is proportional to the product of inductance and this quantity. The
quality factor of a resonator is proportional to the product of this quantity with energy stored over power
lost. For an inductor-capacitor circuit, one type of this quantity can be found by one over the square root of
L C; that is the ordinary version multiplied by two pi, which is known as the angular type. This quantity is
perceived aurally as pitch, and like wavelength, its perceived value changes as a sound source approaches
or recedes from an observer in the Doppler effect. Name this quantity often measured in hertz, the
reciprocal of period.
ANSWER: frequency [prompt on lowercase/little f; accept angular frequency; prompt on lowercase/little omega]
The reactance of an inductor is equal to this quantity times the inductance, and resonance occurs at the
natural type of this quantity. Beats occur two waves have very close values for this quantity. High-energy
waves like gamma rays have higher values for this quantity, since the energy is equal to h-bar times this
quantity. The Doppler effect results in a shift in this quantity which is measured in Hertz and which is equal
to the number of oscillations per second. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to velocity divided by
wavelength that has units of one over time.
ANSWER: frequency [accept angular frequency]
A function can be transformed into this quantity's namesake domain by the Fourier Transform. The
product of this quantity and Planck's constant gives the energy of a photon. Harmonics are integer multiples
of its fundamental type. It's angular type is multiplied by two pi radians. For a pendulum, it is one over two
pi times square root of g over length. It is equal to the speed of light over wavelength. For 10 points, name
this quantity equal to one over the period and measured in Hertz.
ANSWER: frequency
In a network, the steepness of the loss curve as a function of the log of this quantity is called "roll-off". The
logarithm of this quantity is the independent variable in a Bode plot, which will display kinks at "cutoff"
values of this quantity. For an LC circuit, "L times C, all to the minus one-half" is the circuit's "natural"
value of this quantity. A critical value of this quantity that is equal to half a system's sampling rate gives the
value above which aliasing occurs, and is named for Nyquist. For an ideal mass on a spring, the square root
of the ratio of the spring constant and the mass is another "natural" value of this quantity, whose namesake
domain is related by the Fourier transform to the time domain. For 10 points, name this quantity that equals
the velocity of a wave divided by its wavelength, and whose SI unit is the hertz.
ANSWER: frequency [or angular frequency]
The log of this value is the x axis of a Bode plot. In Shannon's theorem, a log term is multiplied by a
number that has the same units as these and represents a width of these. For a cyclotron, this value is q b
over two pi m. The set of these associated with a string under tension are multiples of a quantity that is the
square root of the ratio of the product of length and tension to mass all divided by twice the length. For a
pendulum, it is equal to the square root of the ratio of g to length divided by two pi. This value is inversely
proportional to the wavelength. For 10 points, name this number of times a cyclical occurrence happens in
a period of time which is measured in hertz.
ANSWER: frequency
The Nyquist value of this quantity is half the sampling value and is used for filters preventing aliasing.
These values give the domain when a signal is broken down into its components using a Fourier transform.
When the driving value of this quantity equals the natural value of this quantity for a system, resonance
occurs. For a moving wave, this quantity equals speed divided by wavelength, and this is the reciprocal of
period. Name this quantity measured in Hertz.
ANSWER: frequency
For an undulator, the most prominent value for this quantity is proportional to the Lorentz gamma
squared over the sum one plus the product of the Lorentz gamma squared and the angle squared. For
alternating current in a conductor, the skin depth is given by the square root of the quantity two over the
product of permeability, conductivity, and this quantity. The levels of the quantum harmonic oscillator are
quantized in discrete units of this quantity. The energy of a photon is given by Planck's constant times this
quantity, and for a pendulum, this quantity is given by the square root of the gravitational acceleration over
the length. For ten points, identify this quantity in physics which is the inverse of the period and has units
of inverse seconds, or hertz.
ANSWER: frequency
One form of this quantity equals the square root of mass times g times length divided by moment of inertia
for a physical pendulum. For a spring, that same value is the square root of the spring constant over mass.
That quantity is symbolized omega and is known as the "angular" type of this value. For an electromagnetic
wave, this quantity is equal to cover lambda, making this value inversely proportional to wavelength. This
quantity has units of inverse seconds because it is the reciprocal of the period. For 10 points, name this
quantity representing the number of cycles per unit time, often measured in hertz.
ANSWER: frequency [or angular frequency; prompt on "f"]
The Stribeck curve gives this quantity as a function of steady-state velocity. Laws involving this
quantity were first discovered by Leonardo da Vinci, but mathematically written two centuries later
by Charles Coulomb. For a body on an incline, the coefficient associated with it is equal to the
tangent of the incline angle. The (*) "static" version of this quantity is proportional to the normal force
and independent of the area of contact. For 10 points, name this force that retards the motion of an object
sliding along a solid surface.
ANSWER: friction
The Hubble type is a result inherent to the expansion of the universe, while velocity-dependent forms of this
force cause harmonic oscillators to be called "damped" and are commonly proportional to speed squared at
high speeds and for thin fluids. One such form is responsible for objects having a terminal velocity they
cannot exceed. Typically dissipating energy as heat, it is most commonly divided into static and kinetic
forms, both of which are proportional to the magnitude of the normal force. FTP, identify this force which
opposes the motion of an object.
ANSWER: friction
Amontons' laws govern this phenomenon. Relations for the dry form of this phenomenon were first
explained by Coulomb. This phenomenon results in the change of kinetic energy into heat. The magnitude
of this force equals the magnitude of the normal force times this force's namesake coefficient, which is
symbolized mu and comes in static and kinetic varieties. For 10 points, name this force that opposes the
motion of an object, caused by two surfaces rubbing together.
ANSWER: friction
This force is necessary for the phenomenon of rolling without slipping; during that motion, this force is
sometimes known as traction. The kinetic coefficient of this force is a constant, and is less than the
maximum static coefficient, which is proportional to the normal force. For 10 points, name this force that
retards motion of an object across a surface with which it is in contact.
ANSWER: friction
A model of this phenomenon developed in Lund and Grenoble built on an earlier one that analogized its
relation with position to a stress-strain curve and accounted for hysteresis in the case of permanent
displacement. Described by the Dahl model, this behavior was shown by IBM in 2008 at a molecular level
using an atomic force microscope on cobalt atoms cooled to 5K. This phenomenon causes head loss
proportional to the flow velocity squared divided by the hydraulic diameter and multiplied by the pipe
length as well as a value describing this phenomenon named for Darcy. The strength of this force is
independent of contact area and sliding velocity according to laws named for Amontons and Coulomb. For
10 points, name this force whose maximum value is proportional to the normal force and which opposes
motion.
ANSWER: friction
Two kinds of this force cause inconsistencies in rigid-body dynamics in the Painleve paradox. The
Tomlinson model describes this force at the atomic level, and this force causes buildup of electrostatic
charge in the triboelectric effect. The independence of this force from area of contact is described by
Amonton's second law, and for a block on an inclined plane, the static coefficient of this force is equal to
the tangent of the angle. For 10 points, name this force perpendicular to the normal force, which resists the
motion of objects sliding against each other.
ANSWER: friction [accept word forms]
When this is present in a harmonic oscillator damping can occur, while approximations used to model it
assume that it is independent of contact area. On the molecular scale, this phenomenon is caused by
deformation of irregularities in surfaces and subsequent heat loss. This force allows a wheel to roll without
slipping and has a model named for Coulomb. That model for this force states that for a body at rest it is
less than or equal to the normal force times a namesake coefficient, and it has static and kinetic varieties.
For 10 points, name this force which opposes sliding motion between two surfaces.
ANSWER: frictional force
Bowden and Tabor formulated a law for this force by using asperities. The Stribeck curve is used to
categorize the properties of this force. For metals in a vacuum, this force can create a "cold weld."
The stick-slip phenomenon is due to this force. One form of this force is also known as the Coloumb
type. According to (*) Amontons' first law, this force is proportional to the normal force. The coefficient
of this force, symbolized mu, is usually higher for its static form than its kinetic form. This force increases
with the roughness of surfaces. For 10 points, name this force on objects in contact that opposes motion.
ANSWER: friction
One constant associated with the "skin" form of this phenomenon is calculated using the local wall
shear stress, fluid density, and free-stream velocity, while the "stick-slip" model of this phenomenon
is velocity-dependent. This phenomenon is governed by Amontons- laws, and the (*) triboelectric
effect describes how electric charge is transferred as a result of this force. Coulomb developed laws
regarding its "dry" form, and this force does no work on a rolling object. In fluids, this force is called drag,
and it generally converts energy into heat. This force exists in static and kinetic varieties, and can be
calculated by multiplying mu ("mew") times the normal force. For ten points, name this force that opposes
motion.
ANSWER: friction
In the presence of a vacuum, this force can create a cold weld between smooth metals and is dependent
on molecular forces. Coulomb's (KOO-loms) law states that it is independent of sliding velocity. This force
increases with the roughness of surfaces. Amontons' laws state that this force is proportional to the applied
load and independent of area of contact. The coefficient of this force is symbolized mu and is greater for
the static form than for the kinetic form. For 10 points, name this force that opposes motion.
ANSWER: friction
This force can cause a buildup of electricity in the triboelectric effect. A coefficient used for this
force is extremely low for Teflon. Coulomb's law states that one variant of this force is independent
of velocity. Amonton's law states that it is independent of contact area. The magnitude of this force
can be found by multiplying a dimensionless quantity (*) "mu" with the normal force. For 10 points,
name this force that comes in static and kinetic varieties and which resists an object's motion.
ANSWER: friction
Free stream velocity, wall shear stress, and fluid density are three parameters used to compute a
constant associated with the "skin" variety of this phenomenon. A law by Coulomb and two by
Amontons describe this phenomenon, which is equal to its maximum possible value in the case of
impending motion. Ball and roller bearings can change a constant associated with value from the (*)
sliding to the rolling variety. This force can be represented by the normal force times a coefficient of either
the kinetic or static variety. For 10 points, identify this force exerted on a material sliding on a different
material.
ANSWER: friction
Amontons- laws govern this force which is perpendicular to the normal force. Terminal velocity occurs
when the fluid type of this force, called drag, is equal to velocity of the object. This force is proportional to
the load and independent of surface area. This force is calculated by multiplying the normal force by its
coefficient, which is symbolized mu. The static type of this force has a higher value than the coefficient of
the kinetic type. For 10 points, name this force that opposes motion.
ANSWER: friction
One instrument used to measure this finds the ratio between the hanging mass and the sitting mass.
Amonton's Second Law states that it is independent of contact area. Terminal velocity is reached when this
force equals the driving force. The coefficient for the static type of this phenomenon is typically higher
than that of the kinetic type, both symbolized mu. For 10 points, name this non-conservative force that is
perpendicular to the normal force and resists motion.
ANSWER: friction [or drag or damping]
On the atomic scale, this interaction can be described by the Tomlinson Model. The internal variety
of this force can be induced when a solid material undergoes plastic deformation. A non-electrostatic
law named for (*) Coulomb states that the magnitude of this force is independent of velocity, while
Amontons- Law counter-intuitively states that it is independent of surface area as well. Instead, this force's
magnitude is proportional to the normal force. This force allows "rolling without slipping" to occur. It
comes in static and kinetic forms. For ten points, name this force which always opposes the motion of two
objects rubbing against each other.
ANSWER: friction
A parameter named for this force is proportional to four pi squared times the amplitude in the atomic scale
Tomlinson model. This force is the namesake of a dimensionless factor that appears in the Darcy-Weisbach
equation. This force is independent of area according to Amontons' second law. The coefficient for one type
of this force is symbolized mu-sub-s, and another type of this force is equal to its namesake coefficient
times the normal force. Those two types of this force are static and kinetic. For 10 points, name this force
that opposes the movement of objects.
ANSWER: friction [or frictional force]
This phenomenon is described on the atomic scale by the Prandtl-Tomlinson model and also names a
dimensionless factor in the Darcy-Weisbach equation. A law named for Guillaume Amontons states this
phenomenon is independent of area. The coefficient of this phenomenon is plotted on the y-axis of the
Stribeck curve. Triboelectricity is generated by this force, which is also responsible for damping oscillations
and converting kinetic energy into thermal energy. The static type of this force exists between a stationary
object and the surface upon which it rests. For 10 points, name this force that two bodies in contact exert on
each other.
ANSWER: friction
Pendry described this entity via the van der Waals force between two infinite slabs of dielectric and linked it
to quantum shearing in a vacuum. The rolling type of this, which like other types is governed by Amontons-
laws, occurs due to deformation of objects, and Coulomb developed a law for its dry kinetic type.
According to those laws, this force only depends on the strength of the applied load and is independent of
sliding velocity and area of contact. For 10 points, name this force, whose magnitude equals its namesake
coefficient times the normal force and which itself resists movement along a surface.
ANSWER: friction
The static form of this force typically has a coefficient larger than the coefficient of the kinetic form of
this force. Those coefficients are represented by the Greek letter mu (MEW). The kinetic coefficient is
found by taking the value of this force over the value of the normal force. This force works perpendicular to
gravity and the normal force and in opposition to an applied force. For 10 points, name this force that
occurs between two objects moving against one another, which causes objects to slow down as they move
over a rough surface.
ANSWER: friction force
For a solid-liquid suspension, Ralph Bagnold defined a "dynamic" version of this force and
characterized its "effective angle" as the arctangent of the ratio of the normal and shear stresses. The
Bilman-Sorine Model modifies the Dahl Model to account for this force's decrease with increasing velocity
in the low-velocity regime, an effect discovered by Richard Stribeck. Counterintuitively, it is independent
of cross-sectional area by Amontons' Second Law. Amontons' First Law, rediscovered by Charles
Coulomb, states that the magnitude of this force is proportional to the normal force. For 10 points, name
this force that retards the sliding of two surfaces across each other.
ANSWER: friction
This force acts in a non-linear manner in a paradox of rigid-body dynamics pointed out by Paul Painleve.
The magnitude of this force is independent of the apparent area according to Amonton's second law. This
force, which is naively modeled using atomic interactions in the Coulomb model, can be measured using a
tribometer. This force is directly proportional and perpendicular to the normal contact force. For 10 points,
name this force that comes in kinetic and static types, the latter of which prevents objects at rest from
sliding.
ANSWER: dry friction
This force is described on the atomic scale by the Tomlinson model, and one of the Amontons laws
posits that this force is independent of surface area. The absence of this force is called superlubricity, and
this force's namesake coefficient is typically less than 1, and is symbolized mu. That coefficient is
multiplied by the normal force to obtain the value for this force. For 10 points, name this force generated by
objects rubbing against each other.
ANSWER: friction force
This quantity is time dependent in models where Tresca plasticity is assumed, while Archard's model for
this assumes uses a term for shear stress instead of the Bowden-Tabor model, which takes into account the
area of the asperities. The dry form of it is independent of velocity according to Coulomb's law, and
Amonton's law states that this quantity is proportional to the normal force. Existing in static and kinetic
forms, for 10 points, identify this force that opposes motion.
ANSWER: friction
In laminar flow, sixty-four over over the Reynolds number gives Darcy's dimensionless factor of this
quantity. Chandrasekhar describes a dynamical version of this that moving bodies experience due to loss of
energy from gravitational interactions with mass in space. Drag is sometimes known as the air type of this
phenomenon, and Coulomb names its simplified dry type. Its coefficient is symbolized mu, and this force
occurs in kinetic and static varieties. For 10 points, name this force that opposes motion when two objects
rub against each other.
ANSWER: friction
John Theophilus Desagulier had a significant impact on the study of this phenomenon by proposing an
adhesive model of it. Archard improved one theory of this phenomenon by assuming elastic deformation in
addition to plastic deformation. That theory is partially proportional to shear strength divided by the yield
pressure of the concept and was proposed by Bowden and Tabor. Coloumb designed the first tribometer,
used to measure the coefficient of it. It is directly proportional to the applied load according to the first of
Amonton's laws but is independent of the area of contact. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon that
resists the movement of two objects in contact.
ANSWER: friction
A machine used to measure this phenomenon comes in pin-on-a-disc and four-ball varieties. The
arctangent of its coefficient is equal to the angle of repose, and the coefficient of this phenomenon is the
y-coordinate of the Stribeck curve. On a non-banked curve, this is the force that provides the centripetal
acceleration. This force is equal to a coefficient, mu, times the normal force, and it occurs parallel to a
ramp. For 10 points, name this force that comes in kinetic and static varieties, the resistance to sliding
between two surfaces.
ANSWER: friction [accept kinetic friction or static friction]
This can be described by Amontons' law, and it is related to viscosity and velocity by the Stribeck
curve. It can be measured by a tribometer. For the dry form, a relation discovered by Coulomb can
be used. The coefficients of this phenomena can be either for the (*) kinetic or static cases. It is
proportional to the normal force and independent of the area of contact. For 10 points, name this resistive
process between moving items that are in physical contact.
ANSWER: friction
Amontons- laws concern the "dry" form of this phenomenon, which was modeled by Coulomb, and
state that it is independent of the surface area of contact between two objects. Its namesake (*)
coefficient has the symbol mu, and comes in static and kinetic varieties. For 10 points, name this force
directly proportional to the normal force that opposes the motion of an object.
ANSWER: frictional force
David Tabor and Frank Philip Bowden showed how this force was related to asperities. Their
analysis differed from the laws for this force determined by Guillaume Amontons (GIE-ahm
AH-mohn-tohn). This force has static and kinetic (*) coefficients for when an object is stationary or
moving, respectively. The standard equation for this force is F equals mu times N. For an object moving
horizontally, it is perpendicular to the normal force. For 10 points, name force that resists the movement of
an object in contact with a surface.
ANSWER: friction force
An inconsistency between Newtonian restitution and a common model of this phenomenon was known as
the Painleve [pawn-luh-veh] paradox. The velocity named for this concept, also known as shear velocity, is
used in the Bagnold formula. This is mapped in chemical force microscopy, a type of atomic force
microscopy. Some of its qualities are covered by laws named after Amontons [ah-mohn-tohn] and
Coulomb, such as its independence of area and speed, and the magnitude of this force is proportional to the
normal force. It may be classified as static or kinetic. Name this resistive force that slows down objects.
ANSWER: friction(al force)
For a uniform ball rolling down an incline with angle theta, a coefficient of proportionality associated
with this quantity must be at least two-sevenths tangent theta to prevent slipping. A slipping ball, however,
requires a different coefficient associated with the quantity, because the coefficient depends on whether or
not the contact points are moving. Both the static and kinetic type of this force are proportional to the
normal force. For 10 points, name this force that opposes the direction of an object's motion.
ANSWER: frictional force
Systems affected by this phenomenon exhibit spring-like motion over very small distances in the Dahl
effect. Its magnitude unexpectedly decreases at near-zero velocities in the Stribeck Effect. More
commonly, it is described by the Coulomb model, which includes Amontons' laws, the first of which states
that this force is independent of the contact area and the second of which claims that its magnitude is
proportional to that of the normal force. The coefficient associated with this force is denoted by mu and is
higher for the static type than the kinetic type. For 10 points, name this force that retards the motion of an
object moving along a surface.
ANSWER: friction
This force's namesake parameter is proportional to four pi squared times the amplitude of the
potential according to the Tomlinson model. This force is ignored when solving the tautochrone and
brachistochrone problems. Electric charge is transferred by this force in the triboelectric effect, and
it is independent of [*] velocity, unlike the similar drag force. This force turns kinetic energy into heat, and
the normal force is multiplied by this force's namesake static or kinetic coefficient to calculate the strength
of this force. For 10 points, name this force that opposes the motion of two bodies in contact.
ANSWER: friction
Various phenomena associated with this force can be described by the creation and annihilation of modes
called shearons. Defects along a surface can lead to energetic corrugations resulting in this force according
to the Tomlinson model, which describes it on the atomic level. The triboelectric effect is charging as a
consequence of this force, whose "skin" variety occurs at a body-fluid interface. It is independent of surface
area according to one of Amontons- Laws, and superlubricity is the total absence of this force. For 10
points, identify this force which is perpendicular to the normal force and provides resistance when two
surfaces slide over each other.
ANSWER: friction
Bowden and Tabor explained the mechanisms of this force with the idea of asperities. The threshold of
motion divides the amount of applied force needed to move between the static and kinetic types of this
force. The value of this force on an object can be determined by taking its coefficient times the force
perpendicular to the surface the object is on, also known as the normal force. For 10 points, name this force
that resists the motion of objects across a surface.
ANSWER: friction
Moody diagrams are used to calculate a factor associated with this quantity that is used in the DarcyWeisbach equation. This term also describes a quantity used in the Bagnold formula that is proportional
to the Reynolds stress. It is proportional to velocity squared for fluids and Amonton's law states that the
magnitude of this is proportional to the normal force. Existing in static and dynamic varieties, for 10
points, identify this force which acts in the opposite direction of motion.
ANSWER: friction
One model of this phenomenon, describing it as a point in a periodically corrugated landscape, is
named for Tomlinson. Painleve's paradox arises from bodies experiencing both this phenomenon and
a variant form named for Coulomb. Imparting an electric charge to materials by this phenomenon,
which is governed by (*) Amonton's Law, is known as triboelectricity. This force is proportional to
applied load and independent of contact area, and its static type is usually higher than its kinetic type. For
10 points, name this force that resists the motion of two surfaces sliding past each other.
ANSWER: friction
John Hopkins physicist Mark Robbins- research on this phenomenon has shed light on the
importance of "the stuff in the middle" when dealing with it at a molecular level. At high pressures,
this quantity's value deviates from its usual relationship and spikes sharply, and according to
Amonton's law its value is usually independent of (*) surface area. This quantity along with interference
drag is a component of parasitic drag and the field of research related to it is known as tribology.. Graphite
can exhibit a massive decrease in this quantity known as superlubricity, and it can manifest in rolling,
kinetic, and static types. FTP, name this force proportional to the normal force that acts in the opposite
direction of motion.
ANSWER: frictional force [Do not accept or prompt on any particular type of friction]
This phenomenon originates from asperities which can be modeled with the Archard equation. On an atomic
scale, this is described by the Tomlinson model, including a namesake parameter that, when greater than
one, results in the stick-slip variety of this phenomenon. Reye hypothesized that this is proportional to
volume of wear debris. Amontons- second law states that it is independent of the area of the contact surface.
It is equal to the normal force times mu, its namesake coefficient, which has static and kinetic varieties. For
ten points, name this force that acts opposite motion.
ANSWER: friction
This force is represented by a first derivative with respect to position in the harmonic oscillator equation. In
one model, this force stems from tiny electrostatic repulsions. It can be understood as the parallel shear
component of the contact force, whose other component is typically calculated as mg cosine theta. It is
calculated from a coefficient, symbolized mu, multiplied by the normal force. Rolling motion is affected by
the "kinetic" type of this force, which is known as "drag" in fluids. For 10 points, name this force that
resists the motion of objects against one another.
ANSWER: friction [or drag before "electrostatic"]
One model describing this phenomenon is named for Tomlinson, which results in a slip-stick variety if a
namesake parameter is greater than 1. For a belt-pulley system, this quantity is proportional to e to the angle
the belt makes leaving the pulley versus entering it. One law by Coulomb and two laws by Amonton
describe it, and its usual mechanical form is given by the normal force of an object times its namesake
coefficient. It comes in static and kinetic varieties, and this force always opposes the direction of motion.
For 10 points, name this force that results from two surfaces being in contact.
ANSWER: Friction
Petroff's law calculates a value associated with this quantity for lightly-loaded bearings. The y-axis of a
Moody diagram measures a factor related to this concept, which is calculated in the Darcy-Weisbach
equation. The Stribeck curve is used to characterize this between different surfaces and the triboelectric
effect is a method of charging objects using this concept. This quantity is equal to the product of normal
force and a coefficient symbolized by mu, and it causes damping in simple harmonic oscillators and drag in
fluids. Name this force that exists in static and kinetic forms and resists motion.
ANSWER: friction [accept friction factor before mentioned]
The dry form of this force occurs between two solid surfaces and is governed by a set of three laws
developed by Guillame Amontons and Charles Coulomb. Taking the inverse tangent of a value
associated with this force gives the angle at which an object can overcome this force, known as the
angle of repose. This force is calculated by multiplying the normal force acting on an object by a
dimensionless coefficient and is reduced by oil based lubricants. For 10 points, name this force that comes
in kinetic and static forms that opposes motion.
ANSWER: friction
A constant representing this phenomenon equals 64 over the Reynolds number for laminar flow. The
arctangent of a constant associated with this phenomenon gives the angle of repose. This phenomenon
results in the only net torque through the center of mass on a ball rolling down a hill. It is responsible for the
buildup of static charges in the triboelectric effect. Most damping is caused by a form of this phenomenon.
Its magnitude is proportional to the normal force with a coefficient symbolized mu. It comes in static and
kinetic forms, and its magnitude can be reduced with lubricants. For 10 points, name this force which
dissipates heat when two objects are rubbed against each other.
ANSWER: friction [prompt on "drag"; prompt on "air resistance"]
This phenomenon is governed by Amontons- laws and has a "dry" variety modeled by an equation named
for Coulomb. It can be measured with a tribometer and can be reduced to near zero in graphite. It is
proportional to the normal force, and this force's namesake coefficient is denoted by the letter mu [MEW].
It comes in static and kinetic varieties. For 10 points, name this force which opposes the movement of
surfaces in contact with each other.
ANSWER: friction
Rabinowicz studied the behavior of this phenomenon for small displacements. Efficient modeling of this
phenomenon makes use of a small velocity interval in the Karnopp model, while a rate-independent model
proposed by Bliman and Sorine allow the use of Hysteresis theory. That model is derived from a stressstrain model named for Dahl Haessig and Friedland proposed a reset integrator model as a simplification of
a bristle model based on simple harmonic oscillators. A parameter proportional to this effect has a
minimum at low velocity in Stribeck effect. In the simplest model of this phenomenon, named for
Coloumb, a plot of its magnitude against velocity looks like a step function proportional to the normal
force. For 10 points, name this non-conservative force which opposes motion.
ANSWER: Friction [accept dynamic friction, reverse prompt on any other kind of "friction" or "stiction"]
MOSFET transistors can be destroyed due to a phenomenon tangentially related to this, known as
the triboelectric effect. One effect which has reduced it to almost zero has been observed in graphite,
and thermoplastics frequently utilize its namesake welding. Stokes- law describes the force exerted by
its fluid analog, and its most common model was actually first described by Coulomb. Minimized by
HDTE, nylon, and ball bearings and frequently occurring in static and kinetic varieties, for 10 points,
name this force resisting motion involving two surfaces.
ANSWER: friction
This property has two coefficients, one of which is sometimes called limiting and is always used for an
object that is stationary. Once that static coefficient of this property is exceeded by a force, the kinetic
coefficient of this property is used. Those coefficients of this force are represented by the Greek letter mu
(myou). This force is always perpendicular to the normal force. For 10 points, name this force that has a
greater value for rougher surfaces and is the resistance to motion of an object across a surface.
ANSWER: friction
The proportionality constant is plotted against the Sommerfeld number in the Stribeck curve, and
Dahl's model gives the magnitude of this phenomenon as a function of displacement. Though it is not
ferromagnetism, hysteresis operators are used to describe this phenomenon in the Bliman-Sorine
Model. The LuGre model for it originally did not account for non-local memory, and the most
common model for it describes interaction between asperities. The first empirical laws regarding it were
developed by Coulomb who names a "dry" form of this force, and it is proportional to the normal force
exerted on the object. For 10 points, identify this force which always opposes the motion of an object and
comes in static and kinetic varieties.
ANSWER: friction
In the Frenkel-Kontorova-Tomlinson model, this phenomenon arises from a harmonic chain undergoing
stick-slip behavior. In harmonic oscillators it is proportional to speed and causes damping. A body's
interface with a fluid often exhibits the skin form of this force, which is independent of area of contact and
proportional to the applied load. Converting kinetic energy to heat, it has different coefficients for its static
and kinetic types, for 10 points, name this force opposing motion between two objects.
ANSWER: friction
The Sommerfeld number is important in the study of decreasing this phenomenon, and the FrenkelKontorova-Tomlinson model describes it. Its coefficient is related to the Stribeck number by the Stribeck
curve. It causes the formation of tribofilms. It is described by a pair of laws named for Amonton, and the
point where one form of it is overcome is the angle of repose. This force is independent of sliding velocity
and proportional to the normal force. When its strength alternates with motion, the stick-slip phenomenon
occurs. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, which represents the force resisting any sliding motion, and
which comes in static and kinetic varieties.
ANSWER: friction
Models for one form of this phenomenon suggest that asperity junctions are deformed in one regime, while
all such junctions are broken in regimes where velocity becomes important. This phenomenon abnormally
decreases as a function of velocity in the Stribeck effect, though the dynamics of the system change with the
formation of a fluid film. Because it arises due to intermolecular forces, it is dependent to composition,
though it is independent of the surface area of a body. Amontons- first law states that it is directly
proportional to the mass of the object. The coefficient of the static form of this is generally larger than the
kinetic form. For 10 points, identify this force that resists motion.
ANSWER: Friction
The Huemul project was supposed to achieve a controlled version of this process, but met with little
success. The Shiva and ultimately the Nova lasers attempted to contain this process, though more
mainstream attempts include producing heat by inducing a current running through a toroidal magnetic field
in a tokamak. It occurs in sufficiently large stars through the C-N-O cycle, and it no longer returns
additional energy after iron. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which at sufficient temperatures,
several small nuclei form a larger one.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
This process creates a carbon atom in the triple alpha process. Inertial or magnetic confinement of
deuterium and tritium could be used to accomplish this on Earth, and the CNO cycle and proton-proton
chain perform this in stars by converting hydrogen into helium. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which energy is released when multiple atomic nuclei join together to form a single nucleus, often
contrasted with fission.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
This process is energetically favored to the left of the maximum of the binding energy per nucleon; that
is, for elements lighter than iron. One type of this process takes place via the CNO cycle and can be
followed by the triple alpha process, which is also a form of this reaction. This process provides the energy
released in a hydrogen bomb, as well as that generated inside a star. For 10 points, name this process in
which two atomic nuclei combine to make a larger one, the opposite of fission.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
This process can be simplified in an apparatus named for Farnsworth and Hirsch while using a
technique abbreviated as IEC. It is the subject of a criterion using the product of the ion density and
the confinement time; that is Lawson's criterion. For it to occur, the Coulomb repulsive force must
be overcome, and attempts to contain it include the use of a (*) tokamak. This process also occurs in the
proton-proton chain reaction in the sun. Erroneous claims were once made regarding its "cold" variety. For
10 points, identify this thermonuclear reaction in which two light nuclei combine to form a heavier nucleus,
which is contrasted with fission.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [accept cold fusion; DO NOT accept nuclear fission and make sure it's clear that they said fusion]
The British ZETA machine attempted to cause this result by using Z-pinch to run an electric field through a
plasma, creating a magnetic field which confined it. Because a certain lepton easily sticks to the alpha
particles produced in this process, its muon-catalyzed variety is not currently viable. This process produces
the energy in the CNO cycle. A setup involving electrolysis of heavy water was reported to have
experienced this process in an experiment conducted by Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann, though that
"cold" type of this process was later debunked. For 10 points, name this process in which two atomic nuclei
join together.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [do not accept "fission"]
One way to cause this process uses a gas and ion dump to neutralize ions, a technique called
neutral beam injection. The Coulomb barrier must be overcome for it to occur. A commonly used
apparatus to study this phenomena is a tokamak ("TOE"-kuh-mack"). Natural ways to do it include
CNO and the (*) proton-proton chain, which produces helium. In the late 1980's and early 1990's
controversial reports claimed to have developed a "cold" version of this process. For 10 points, name this
process where atomic nuclei combine.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [prompt on heating before "Lawson"]
This process may use a tokamak in its magnetic confinement type. In atoms heavier than iron, this
process absorbs energy, and one example of it is the CNO cycle. It occurs when residual strong forces
overcome electrostatic repulsion, which requires (*) high temperatures not present in a theoretical "cold"
type of this process. Stars are fueled by, for 10 points, what process in which atomic nuclei combine into a
larger one, contrasted with fission?
ANSWER: nuclear fusion (do not accept "fission")
This process occurs in the Tore Supra. The triple product evaluates the conditions for the ignition of this
process, which occurs in structures that have magnetic or inertial confinement and are subject to the Lawson
criterion. One limitation to this process is the energy required to overcome the Coulomb barrier. Lithium
burning is one form of this process, another form of which ,involves the formation of deuterium and release
of a gamma ray. In addition to the proton-proton chain and CNO cycle, this process comes in a hypothetical
cold variety. For ten points, name this process of the formation of a larger nucleus from smaller ones,
contrasted with fission.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
In one device in which this process occurs, lasers are fired at both apertures of a hohlraum. This process is
employed in the secondary in the Teller-Ulam device. Another device in which it occurs is covered in a
lithium blanket, which breeds tritium from fast neutrons; that device is a tokamak, in which a plasma is
magnetically confined. Muon catalysis lowers the activation energy for this process over a million-fold.
Astrophysically, this occurs in the proton-proton chain, which culminates in the formation of helium and is
the primary source of energy in the sun. For 10 points, name this process in which lighter elements are
combined to form heavier elements.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [prompt on "nuclear reactions"; do not accept "fission"]
The volume rate at which this process occurs is proportional to the mean sigma-v. For it to occur
sustainably, the product of the particle density and the confinement time must be greater than a critical
value, a result known as the Lawson criterion. Muons can be used to catalyze this process by lowering the
Coulomb barrier. This process can occur in systems on the left side of the peak in the binding energy curve.
Mechanisms such as the CNO cycle and the proton-proton chain use this process to create alpha particles.
This process occurs at temperatures too large for it to be a practical energy source, prompting the search for
a "cold" variety. For 10 points, name this process that takes place in the sun in which two nuclei come
together to form a larger nucleus.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
The Lawson criterion describes the conditions necessary for this to occur, and q values describe its
efficiency. It can occur via inertial confinement or via a stellarator, which are more advanced than
tokamaks. Examples of this process include the CNO cycle and the proton-proton chain. In the late eighties
claims of a "cold" version of this surfaced. This process powers stars. For 10 points, name this process by
which two nuclei come together to make a new nucleus.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
The prime candidate to harness this process as an energy source is a torus-shaped machine, the tokamak
(TOE-kuh-mak), which will hopefully allow deuterium (doo-TARE-ee-um) and tritium to overcome the
Coulomb barrier. This process requires the particles involved to overcome electric repulsion, which
demands extremely high temperatures. The proton-proton variety of this process occurs in stars, and the
"cold" type is largely seen as spurious. For 10 points, name this process in which atoms combine to form a
heavier element.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
For this reaction to occur, components occupying the Gamow window must tunnel through the
Coulomb barrier. When elements heavier than iron are used in this process, a net energy absorption
occurs. Attempts have been made to run current through contained plasma fuel for this process in
toroidal magnetic chambers such as stellarators and [*] tokamaks. The proton-proton chain and the
CNO cycle are two kinds of this process by which stars turn hydrogen into helium, and Fleischmann and
Pons did not actually discover a "cold" version of this process. For 10 points, identify this process by which
several small atomic nuclei combine to form a larger one.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
Zel-dovich theorized and Luis Alvarez at Berkeley experimentally showed that this process can be
catalyzed by muons. The Lawson Criterion governs the conditions for the ignition of this process,
which must overcome the (*) Coulomb Barrier to begin. In one type of this reaction, the triple-alpha
process is used to create a CNO cycle. This is the reaction used in the ITER (EAT-er) project, which uses a
technology pioneered by the Soviet physicists Tamm and Shakharov to magnetically confine plasma, the
Tokamak. It most commonly combines deuterium and tritium into helium-4. For 10 points, the stars are
powered by this type of nuclear reaction, the opposite of fission.
ANSWER: Nuclear Fusion [accept Muon Catalyzed Fusion before "muon"; prompt on "Cold Fusion" before "muon," BUT DO NOT prompt or accept afterwards]
This reaction's "triple product" of density, temperature, and time is a generalization of the earlier
Lawson criterion for it. Muons can catalyze this process by replacing electrons in hydrogen bonds,
and the beam-target variety of this reaction loses too much energy to bremsstrahlung. Failing to
account for the less-than-100% Faraday-efficiency in the (*) electrolysis of water led Pons and
Fleischmann to falsely claim this process had occurred at room temperature, its "cold" type. This type of
reaction is central to the CNO cycle and the proton-proton chain. For ten points, identify this process in
which multiple atomic nuclei are combined.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
Past proposals have suggested using bubble chambers to further this process, while devices called
tokamaks are designed to study this process by sustaining plasma tori. Brown dwarfs are celestial objects
who are not able to sustain this process and are thus referred to as "failed stars," since bodies such as the
Sun continually perform this process. For 10 points name this term for the joining of atomic nuclei whose
"cold" variety has yet to prove viable, and that is contrasted with fission.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
Hans Bethe discovered a cycle by which this process occurs and which is named for the three elements
which act as catalysts. Pons and Fleischmann (FLYSH-min) erroneously claimed in 1989 that they could
achieve this process at room temperature. This process, which takes place via the CNO (see en oh) cycle in
massive stars, yields a product which is subsequently used in the triple alpha process. The sun
accomplishes this via the proton-proton chain. For 10 points, name this energy-rich process which produces
helium from the lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen fusion [or nuclear fusion; or cold fusion before "CNO" is read]
In 2006 it was shown that introducing chaotic static into devices designed for this process would eliminate
the problem of edge-localized modes. Philo Farnsworth names a table-top device for this process, which
will only occur when the volume rate times energy of the charged products is greater than energy losses
according to the Lawson criterion. ITER is an international project of this process that will use its magnetic
confinement method and a giant tokamak. Fleischmann and Pons reported "excess heat" which is explained
by one form of this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this process by which energy is released from the
combination of smaller nuclei to larger ones.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [accept more specific answers]
In 2005, a UCLA group achieved this process by combining a cool crystal with a tungsten needle to
produce an electric field in its "pyroelectric" form. Mark Oliphant was the first person to carry out this
process, which was reportedly accomplished by Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann. The Big Bang
nucleosynthesis consisted of many iterations of this process creating the lightest isotopes and elements.
This process occurs in the Sun's core. For ten points, name this reaction in which two atomic nuclei join
together, the opposite of fission.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [accept cold fusion at any point]
One form of this process is catalyzed by muons. It can occur via the CNO cycle. One proposed form
of this process involves magnetic confinement of a plasma in a tokamak. The fact that the Coulomb
barrier must be overcome for this process to occur is a common argument against its (*) "cold" type.
Stellar nucleosynthesis of elements lighter than iron mostly occurs through this process. It occurs upon the
detonation of a hydrogen bomb, where it is initiated by nuclear fission. For 10 points, name this process in
which two or more nuclei are combined into one.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion
One byproduct of this type of reaction can be trapped in a "blanket" structure; that particular
reaction of this type is known as the "D-T" reaction. The word denoting this type of reaction is
sometimes also used as a synonym for "melting." It requires high-temperature plasmas, though
Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann erroneously claimed to have invented a (*) "cold" version of
this reaction. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in which the nuclei of light atoms are joined
together, a reaction whose opposite is fission.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [do not accept "fission"]
Hans Bethe won the Nobel Prize for studying this type of reaction in space. Martin Fleischmann and
Stanley Pons claimed to have detected excess heat that could only be explained by this reaction in 1989.
Edward Teller was an early advocate and researcher for weapons that used this reaction. For 10 points,
name this process of atoms binding together to form heavier elements.
ANSWER: nuclear fusion [or cold fusion; do not accept "fission;" prompt on nuclear reaction, etc.]
Plasma generated in their inner sphere can be manipulated through alteration of grid potentials.
Excess electrons are caught in a negative potential well in these devices and they can produce (*)
neutrons through the D-D reaction. Their applications include functioning as gas diodes and an ion
multipactors. For 10 points, name this class of devices named after Farnsworth and Hirsch which utilize
inertial electrostatic confinement to produce nuclear fusion reactions.
ANSWER: fusors
The "Death Star" type of this entity was the first example of one striking its companion with a jet of energy.
Energetic varieties of these include the Pea and LIRG types. The luminosity and rate of rotation of these are
related by the Tully-Fisher relation. Dark matter is a solution to a problem stemming from their observed
rotation curves. Emissions from the radio variety of these are due to synchrotron emission from their cores,
which may be the result of their active nuclei. Objects in their halos include globular clusters, and some of
these contain supermassive black holes in their centers. Name these entities, the spiral type of which is
exemplified by the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies
The luminosity of these structures is related to the width of their rotation curves according to the
Tully-Fisher relation. The "active nuclei" of these structures are thought to contain supermassive black
holes. The structures can form clusters or groups, such as the Local Group, which contain the Triangulum.
The "Hubble tuning fork" classifies these structures into lenticular, elliptical, or spiral types. For 10 points,
name these collections of stars, examples of which include the Andromeda and the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies [or galaxy]
Mergers between these objects can be classified as wet or dry depending on their gas richness. Modified
Newtonian Dynamics can be used to explain their namesake rotation problem. Hoag's Object is an example
of the ring type of them, and they can be organized into groups, clusters, and superclusters. These
astronomical objects are classified on a tuning-fork diagram devised by Edwin Hubble, who also names a
law stating the distance between them is increasing. For 10 points, name these systems of dust, gas, and
stars that can have elliptical or spiral shapes.
ANSWER: galaxies [or galaxy]
The Cigar one of these objects is an example of the starburst type, and starbursts can also occur when these
objects collide. Seyfert ones of these contain active nuclei which are believed to contain supermassive black
holes. Edwin Hubble created a "tuning fork" mechanism for classifying these as barred spiral, elliptical, or
spiral. For 10 points, name these groups of billions of stars, which include the nearby Andromeda and our
own Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies [or galaxy]
Bottom-up theories of their formation involve the accretion of smaller clusters that consist mostly of
Population II objects. Their rotation curves indicate that most of their mass is located in their halos, which
may be populated by CDM such as WIMPs. The speed of distant ones is governed by Hubble's law, which
indicates that on large scales, all of them are moving away from Earth. Blazars are examples of ones with
active nuclei, wherein the nucleus is a supermassive black hole. Coming in elliptical, irregular, and spiral
types, for 10 points, name these gravitationally-bound collections of stars and dust, such as the Andromeda
and Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies [or galaxy; accept Andromeda galaxy; accept Milky Way galaxy; accept active galactic nuclei; prompt on "AGNs"]
Mergers between these astronomical objects when one is much more massive than the other is known as
cannibalism. Most of these structures are found in larger groups and clusters such as the Local Group. They
are often categorized by the Hubble sequence based on their visual appearance, and they can be classified as
lenticular, elliptical, and spiral. Supermassive black holes are believed to exist in the center of many of
these structures. For 10 points, name this astronomical massive gravitationally bound system, examples of
which include the Andromeda and the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxy
A major "accretion event" likely created Hoag's Object, which is one of these objects, and the Antennae are
a pair of interacting ones of these. Gerard de Vaucouleurs improved on a tuning-fork shaped morphological
classification for these objects created by Edwin Hubble. Lenticular and elliptical are varieties of these
entities that include the Andromeda one. FTP, name these types of celestial objects whose centers contain
supermassive black holes, known for spiral ones such as the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Galaxy
One class of these objects are described by the Tully-Fisher relation or the Faber-Jackson relation. Edwin
Hubble developed a classification system for these objects, while the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds
are irregular types of these. Some of these objects have a bulge in their center that forms around a
supermassive black hole. They are classified based on their shape into elliptical or spiral types. For 10
points, name these stellar objects exemplified by the Andromeda and Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies [accept spiral galaxies before Hubble is mentioned]
One type of these entities has structures that should break down upon rotation, a dilemma known as the
"winding problem," which can be resolved using density wave theory. Blazars and quasars are two
examples of the "active nuclei" of these structures, another example of which is found in their "Seyfert"
variant. Their types are shown on the Hubble Tuning Fork diagram. The two Magellanic Clouds are
examples of irregular ones, while Andromeda is a spiral one. For 10 points, name these systems of
astronomical objects, a spiral one of which is the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies [accept word forms; accept spiral galaxies until "Magellanic"]
The "Antennae" are two of these objects that are colliding with each other. These systems have
velocities measurable by Doppler shift that are proportional to their distance from Earth, according
to Hubble's law. Sagittarius A* ["A-star"] is a supermassive (*) black hole at the center of the one of
these systems nearest to Earth. These systems can be irregular, spiral, or elliptical. For 10 points, give this
term for star systems like the Andromeda and our Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxy
The luminosity of different forms of these objects is related to their velocities using the
Faber-Jackson and Tully-Fisher relationships. The Seyfert (SAY-fert) variant emits ionized gas and
is thought to contain an accretion disk and a super massive black hole at their center. Edwin Hubble
developed a "tuning fork" to classify these objects. The (*) Local Group is a collection of these objects
that includes the Large Magellanic Cloud. For 10 points, name these astronomical objects that come in
elliptical and spiral variants and which include Andromeda and the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxy
Central dominant types of these objects become large due to collisions. Ones forming new
components at an unusually high rate are known as starburst ones. According to Hubble's law, more
distant ones of these objects move away faster the more distant they are. If these objects are not
irregular they are either elliptical, barred spiral, or spiral. For 10 points, name this term for a group of stars
bound by gravity and orbiting together, such as the Andromeda one or our Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxy
It is believed that two of these objects collided to form Mayall's Object, and scientists generally consider
the center of Hoag's Object and its ring to form a single one of these. One method of classifying these
objects rates their orientation on a scale from one to seven, while another classification system differentiates
by stage, family, and variety, and another classifies some of these astronomical objects as lenticular. These
are commonly classified as irregular, elliptical, and spiral. Name these objects formerly known as
extragalactic nebulae that include our home, the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies
The luminosities of two types of these entities are described by the Faber-Jackson and
Tully-Fisher relations. The variable surface brightness of one type of these entities was described by
Gerard de Vaucoleurs, who also modified a system for classifying them resembling a tuning fork
developed by Edwin (*) Hubble. That sequence places lenticular ones at the intersection of the prongs. For
10 points, name these large systems of stars and dust that come in irregular, elliptical, and spiral varieties,
and include the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies
One type of these objects features a phenomenon wherein luminosity scales up by the Doppler factor
raised to three minus the spectral index; that is relativistic beaming. The velocity dispersion of
another class of these objects is related to their luminosity by the Faber-Jackson relation. The first type
is first classified as radio-quiet or radio-loud and an early subtype to be discovered was named for Carl
Seyfert. Classes of these objects lie on the Hubble tuning fork and include lenticular and elliptical, and the
Sun is located in one of the spiral arms of one of these objects.. For 10 points, name these astronomical
objects that include the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies [accept active galactic nuclei early]
The CfA2 Great Wall is a filament made of these entities. Seyfert ones exhibit Doppler broadening of their
spectra, indicating the presence of an active nucleus. The distribution of heavy elements is one factor in
determining the "habitable zone" in these entities. Velocity dispersion is related to their luminosity in the
Tully-Fisher relation, but this relation only holds when the object is on one of the tongs of Hubble's Tuning
Fork, which categorizes these objects into elliptical, barred, and spiral. For 10 points, name these entities
that are gravitationally bound systems of dark matter, stars, and dust.
ANSWER: Galaxy [accept Galaxies]
One emerald-shaped type of these objects was found in the constellation Eridanus. The number of these
objects with a certain mass can be found by the Press-Schechter formalism. These objects are the smallest
objects that overcame the Jeans criterion during virialization. It is believed that these objects formed out of
early density fluctuations, which are evident in the CMBR. The lack of a drop-off in the rotation curves of
these objects led to the prediction of dark matter. Narrow line emissions dominate the type 2 of the Seyfert
types of these objects. Most of these objects should contain a supermassive black hole at their center. For
10 points, the Milky Way is an example of what massive collections of stars?
ANSWER: galaxy [do not accept or prompt on spiral galaxies or elliptical galaxies]
Alvio Renzini developed a diagnostic for these objects formation. A large one of these in the Virgo
Cluster is M87. Certain parameters describing these are constrained by the fundamental plane. Type II
supernova have not been observed to occur in these. The brightness of these objects is characterized by De
Vaucouleur's Law. The velocity dispersion and luminosity of these are related by the Faber-Jackson
relation. They are measured on a scale that runs from zero to seven. These objects tend to have little star
formation because of the lack of interstellar matter, and are composed of old stars with low mass. They can
be classified according to the ratio of their major and minor axes. For 10 points, name these galaxies which
are neither lenticular nor spiral.
ANSWER: elliptical galaxies [prompt on galaxies]
The radius of these things is proportional to their average effective surface brightness to the
power of about negative 0.83. Using a Fourier series to fit the isophotes of these things allows
them to be sorted into disky and boxy versions, and they are typically found in the red sequence
of the color-magnitude diagram. One named Maffei I is found in the Zone of Avoidance while a
gigantic one near Virgo emits a pair of powerful jets and is designated M87. The velocity
dispersion profile of these objects, taken to the fourth power, is proportional to the luminosity
according to the Faber-Jackson relation. Eight different types of these galaxies are found on the
unbranched section of the Hubble tuning fork. For 10 points, name these galaxies that have an
elongated shape.
ANSWER: elliptical galaxies
Their brightness profiles are given by de Vaucouleurs' law and the relationship between their luminosity and
their velocity dispersion is known as the Faber-Jackson relation. Their overall lack of H II regions and other
interstellar matter means little star formation and their star movement is mostly random. On the Hubble
tuning fork, classification for them is based on the difference of their major and their minor axis divided by
their major axis, giving a scale of perceived flatness. For 10 points, identify this type of galaxy often
contrasted with spiral galaxies, named for the geometric form they resemble.
ANSWER: elliptical galaxies
Code and Welch first observed the kind of these structures that emit ultraviolet radiation, challenging
popular opinion that they would be dark in that part of the spectrum. Their metallicity is given by the
magnesium-sigma relation. Isophotes that describe these structures may feature a twist in them, or a boxy
appearance. AGNs that emit radio waves are typically found within these structures, one example of which
is M87. They have their surface intensity related to empirical distance via de Vaucouleurs- law. An
empirical law modeling the luminosity of these structures is derived from the fundamental plane relation
and states that the luminosity is equal to the fourth power of the velocity dispersion, which is known as the
Faber-Jackson relation. For 10 points, identify these galaxies named for their oblate shape.
ANSWER: elliptical galaxies [prompt on "galaxies" before mention]
The a4 coefficients for the Fourier series describing a feature of these objects is positive for disky
versions and negative for boxy versions. These objects lie on an inclined fundamental plane of three
parameters that describe them, and the luminosity-color and mass-metallicity relations can be
recovered from that plane. A supergiant one of these notable for two jets coming out of it is (*) M87.
They are characterized by less dust lanes and emission line gas, large dispersion velocities, and older
Population II stars. These galaxies are numbered 0 through 7 on the left hand side of the Hubble tuning-fork
diagram, where they are classified based on their semi-major and semi-minor axes. For 10 points, name
these elongated galaxies which are rounder than spirals.
ANSWER: elliptical galaxies (prompt on "galaxies"; anti-prompt on more specific things like "radio galaxies" or "active galaxies")
Lin and Shu proposed the density-wave theory to explain how the structure of these entities is sustained.
The most accurate method for measuring the distances to distant ones uses a relation between their
maximum rotational velocity and absolute magnitude, which is known as the Tully-Fisher method. They are
generally blue because of their high content of old stars, and one type of them features arms that emanate
from each end of a namesake structure. They have discs like the lenticular type, but contain much more
angular momentum than the elliptical type. FTP name these galaxies, some of which are barred, including
the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Spiral galaxies [prompt on "galaxies"]
One theory of their formation was put forth in 1964 by Lin and Shu. A empirical relationship which defines
the luminosity of this object to the amplitude of its rotation curve is given by the Tully-Fisher relation.
Hubble first described these objects, suggesting that a central concentration of stars creates a characteristic
"bulge." The Triangulum and the Andromeda galaxies are examples of this type and observations from the
Spitzer Space Telescope suggests, for 10 points, that our own galaxy might be a barred form of this type of
galaxy which notably includes arms.
ANSWER: spiral galaxy [prompt on partial answer]
These objects have a resonance named for Bertil Lindblad, who identified an objection to existing models
of them called the "winding problem." Orbital resonance may result in the high prevalence of active nuclei
in the barred variety of these. Predominantly Population II stars are found in the bulges of subclass a, at the
center of which a supermassive black hole may exist. A large number of Population I stars, young and blue,
may be found in their arms. For 10 points, identify this kind of galaxy, examples of which include the
Andromeda Galaxy and the Milky Way.
ANSWER: spiral galaxies [prompt on galaxies]
One form of resonance posited to describe these objects occurs where the difference between the
pattern and co-rotation frequencies is an integer quotient of the epicyclic frequency. Those
resonances exist in the theory of these objects as density waves in a gravitational plasma dispersion
relation; those waves are only quasi-stable as these objects cannot be stable due to the so-called
winding problem. The aforementioned resonances are named for Lindbladt and the aforementioned
theory for (*) Lin and Shu. The rotation rate of these objects increases with luminosity according to the
Tully-Fisher relation. Like their elliptical counterparts, they generally contain a red nucleus. Some of these
galaxies contain bars. FTP, identify this common type of galaxies, exemplified by the milky way,
characterized by their swirling appearance.
ANSWER: spiral galaxies [or S0 galaxies; accept barred spiral galaxies; accept spiral galaxy arms before "galaxies"]
These entities mostly populate the blue cloud of the color-magnitude diagram. When viewed in a
non-inertial reference frame rotating at the global pattern speed, quasi-static density waves can be
observed in these entities. Vera Rubin noted that the rotation curves of these entities did not drop off
with radius as expected. Doppler broadening of the 21 cm line of hydrogen is used to calculate one of
their properties in the Tully-Fisher relation. Objects such as Sagittarius A-Star and other (*)
supermassive black holes form the characteristic bulges at the centers of these galaxies, which Edwin
Hubble plotted on the top of his tuning fork diagram. For 10 points, name this class of galaxy which has a
"barred" variety, one example of which is the Milky Way.
ANSWER: spiral galaxy [accept barred spiral galaxy; prompt on "galaxy"]
Although not Saturn's rings, the density wave theory of Lin and Shu was developed to explain these
objects. These objects have low positive values in the numerical Hubble stage. One of the original
motivations for Modified Newtonian Dynamics was the asymptotically flat rotation curves of these
objects. The luminosity of these objects is empirically correlated with their velocity width according to
the Tully-Fisher relation. These objects are found on the tongs of the Hubble tuning fork and have a central
bulge, halo, and rotating disc. For 10 points, identify this type of galaxy that can be "barred" and which
includes the Milky Way.
ANSWER: spiral galaxies [prompt on lenticular galaxies; accept spiral arms before "Hubble stage"]
The first person to observe these structures was the Third Earl of Rosse, who sketched them after
using the Leviathan of Parsontown. Depending on how well-defined they are, they can be classified as
"grand design" or "flocculent". Vera Rubin examined numerous HII regions in these objects to
conclude that they must be held by dark matter to explain their rotation. Although not Saturn's
rings, density wave theory can be invoked to explain their rotation. These objects may be found on
the (*) tines, but not the base, of Hubble's tuning fork diagram. They are classified as "barred" if a strip of
stars lines their center. For 10 points, name this type of galaxy of which the Milky Way is an example.
ANSWER: spiral galaxies [prompt on galaxies]
Bertil Lindblad presented a "dilemma" presented by these objects that the SSPSF model and the LinShu density wave theory both proclaim to solve. Their axes of rotation line up along cosmic voids in the
"beads on a string" model. These objects make up both "forks" of the Hubble Tuning Fork diagram, and
one variant is the "barred" type. For 10 points, name this type of galaxy characterized by a central bulge
and arms, typified by the Milky Way.
ANSWER: spiral galaxy [prompt on "galaxy"; accept barred spiral before mentioned]
Toomre identified swing amplification as a means by which a pattern in these objects may be
amplified. Resonances in their epicycles drive the density waves in these objects, according to
Lindblad. Lin and Shu modeled them as axisymmetric with small perturbations that turned into
density waves in a model that explains a problem that arises from (*) differential rotation in these
objects. That is the winding problem. These objects appear on the right of the Hubble tuning fork, with the
ones with bars on the bottom. For 10 points, name these galaxies which have curved arms, unlike elliptical
ones.
ANSWER: spiral galaxies (prompt on "galaxies")
The luminosity and rotation speed of these bodies is compared in the Tully-Fisher relation. These bodies
inhabit the right half of Hubble's tuning fork. The youngest and most luminous stars in this type of body are
the furthest from its central bulge. A hybrid of this type of body and an elliptical galaxy forms a lenticular
galaxy. One variety of this type of body contains a bar through the middle, connecting its arms. For 10
points, name this type of galaxy that includes the Milky Way.
ANSWER: bar-spiral galaxy [prompt on galaxy]
The early model of Alar and Jari Toomre demonstrated that the early stages of this process should result in
the production of "tidal tails," and Francois Schweizer argued that this process was observable in NGC
7252. In the "minor" or "slow" variant of this process, bars may be induced through resonant interaction
with the disk, as in the halo formation model of Searle and Zinn. This process is thought to be the cause
behind the formation of Centaurus A, located just outside the Local Group, and another example of this
process will be complete in a few hundred million years with the consumption of the Sagittarius Dwarf
elliptical. For 10 points, identify this process which occurs when objects such as the Milky Way and
Andromeda coalesce into one.
ANSWER: galaxy mergers or galaxy collision [accept anything that indicates that galaxies are intersecting]
Walter Baade was so pissed at Rudolph Minkowski for dissing his theory about this process
occurring in Cygnus A that he bet $1,000, then a case of whiskey, and finally a bottle of whiskey, that
he was right about it. Groundbreaking simulations of this process by Toomre & Toomre showed the
presence of tidal tails. The blue ring-shaped rim around the Cartwheel formation resulted from this
process creating a compressional wave that is driving intense star formation. The best evidence for
dark matter is provided by an example of it in the (*) Bullet Cluster. The distinctive shape of the Mice
and Antennae galaxies is due to them undergoing this process. For 10 points, name this type of astronomical
event that will occur in four billionty years between the Milky Way and Andromeda.
ANSWER: galaxy collisions [or galaxy mergers; or galaxy interactions; or tidal interactions]
This scientist created a fictional character named Salviati who explained that somebody inside a closed ship
cabin cannot detect whether the ship is moving at constant speed or not moving at all in his book Dialogue
Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. That principle led to a pre-relativistic method of adding
velocities, this physicist's namesake reference frame transformations. Another finding of his led to a clock
designed by Christiaan Huygens, and stated that the length but not the mass affected the period of a
pendulum. This person also made telescopes which allowed him to discover his eponymous moons, the four
largest ones of Jupiter. Name this Italian scientist who, according to one of his students, dropped
cannonballs from the Leaning Tower of Pisa.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei [accept either or both names]
In Sidereus Nuncius, this scientist described his observations of four moons orbiting Jupiter. This man
presented arguments in the form of a debate between Simplicio and Salviati in his Dialogue Concerning the
Two Chief World Systems. For 10 points, identify this Florentine whose support of Copernicus's
heliocentrism got him in trouble with the Church.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei
One work by this man contains a thought experiment about a man sitting below decks in a ship not
being able to tell whether the ship is moving. That work is in the form of a conversation between Simplicio
and Salviati, who attempt to convince Sagredo of the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems, respectively. For
10 points, name this scientist, whose Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems was banned by
the Catholic Church for advocating a heliocentric universe.
ANSWER: Galileo [or Galileo Galilei]
A shortened version of this person's name is used for the CGS unit of acceleration. The spacecraft named
for this person, launched from the Space Shuttle Atlantis, was the first orbiter of Jupiter. This person stated
that mathematics is the language of science in his book The Assayer, and he supported the work of
Copernicus in his Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. Name this scientist who was put
under house arrest and who, according to legend, dropped cannonballs from the Leaning Tower of Pisa.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei (accept either)
This man discussed his theories on matter and incorrect theories on comets in his The Assayer. The
characters Salviati and Simplicio debate in one work by this man called Dialogue Concerning the Two
Chief World Systems. This man is often believed to have conducted an experiment which showed that
falling bodies accelerate at the same rate. This man's name is attached to four moons of Jupiter he
discovered. For 10 points, name this Italian astronomer who was tried by the Catholic Church for his belief
in heliocentrism.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei
This figure wrongly criticized Orazio Grassi, claiming that comets weren't real objects, in his
treatise on physics, The Assayer. This man lends his name to a non-relativistic transformation
between (+) inertial reference frames, his own form of relativity. This scientist provided a nonsense
explanation of tides at the end of (*) Dialogues Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, a tract that
forced him into house arrest by the Church. For 10 points, name this scientist who dropped balls off the
Leaning Tower of Pisa and supported Copernicus's heliocentric model of the Solar System.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei
He anticipated Cantor's later work with his paradox, which shows there are as many perfect square numbers
as whole numbers. He wrote a tract against Orazio Gassi that claimed comets were optical illusions, The
Assayer, and proposed that the distance covered by an object accelerating at a constant rate was
proportional to the square of time. One of his works recounts a discussion between Salviati, Sagredo, and
Simplico, but fails to discuss the Tychonian system. For 10 points, identify this man whose Dialogue
Concerning the Two Chief World Systems drew ire from the Church for its support of a heliocentric model
of the universe, an early improver of and user of the telescope.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei
The Lorentz transform reduces to a transform named for this man at small velocities. He feuded with
Thomas Harriot over sunspots and with Grassi over comets. He increased the magnitude of telescopes
twenty-fold. This scientist developed laws of falling bodies by rolling a ball down a gently sloped plane.
His observations of the Mediterranean Sea led to his theory of tides, which he included in a work that
angered Pope Urban VIII. For 10 points, name this Italian scientist who was put on trial by the Inquisition.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei
This scientist had a long debate with Christoph Scheiner over the nature of sunspots. His Starry
Messenger describes his discovery of the four (+) moons of Jupiter that bear his name. He disproved
Aristotle's belief that weight determines falling speed, which involved him (*) dropping different
weights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa. For 10 points, name this scientist whose advocacy of
heliocentrism led to his condemnation by Pope Urban VIII in seventeenth-century Italy.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei
A crystal can absorb radiation of this type without recoil in the Mossbauer effect. This letter
symbolizes a quantity that multiplies time intervals in time dilation and is the reciprocal of "the
square root of one minus beta squared" in special relativity. This letter denotes an extension of the
(*)
factorial function to any real number. This letter denotes an electromagnetic wavelength shorter than x-rays.
For 10 points, name this Greek letter, which follows alpha and beta.
ANSWER: gamma [prompt on electromagnetic; prompt on em]
The lower-case version of this symbol can denote the ratio of heat capacity at constant pressure to that at
constant temperature, the adiabatic index, while its upper-case version can denote a Christofel symbol or a
namesake probability distribution governed by the parameters k and theta. It represents a photon in a
Feynman diagram, as well as the quotient of measured time over proper time in relativity equations, the
Lorentz factor, and the nuclear emission that results from an annihilation. For 10 points, name this Greek
letter that names a function which is a generalization of the factorial and a ray that has a wavelength shorter
than x-rays.
ANSWER: gamma
A constant represented by this letter is defined as one over the square root of quantity one minus the
ratio of v squared to c squared and is named for Lorenz. Iron in the Pound-Rebka experiment emitted
radiation named for this letter. It isn't pi, but a function named for this letter is an extension of the factorial
for positive non-integers. A supernova may cause an extremely high "burst" of radiation named for this
letter, which has the shortest wavelength of all forms of radiation. For 10 points, name this Greek letter that
represents the highest level of electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: gamma
It's not kappa, but in thermodynamics, this letter denotes the ratio between the constant pressure
heat capacity and the constant volume heat capacity. It is the last letter in the nickname of a paper
that outlined the theory of big bang nucleosynthesis. In Feynman diagrams, (*) photons are denoted
with this letter. One quantity symbolized by this letter is one over the square root of the quantity one minus
velocity squared over speed of light squared. That is the Lorentz factor. For 10 points, name this Greek
letter which names the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum with frequency higher than X-rays.
ANSWER: gamma
Mossbauer spectroscopy uses this kind of radiation, usually with iron-57 as a source. This symbol
is used to represent surface tension in the Young-Laplace equation, the Lorentz factor, and the
photon. Annihilation of a positron and electron produces this type of radiation. The Vela satellites
first detected (*) "bursts" of this radiation. For 10 points, identify this Greek letter that names a type of
radiation that is higher in energy than alpha and beta radiation.
ANSWER: gamma
The resonant absorption of this type of radiation by solids, but not gases, is explained by the Mossbauer
effect, and the gravitational shift observed in this kind of radiation was the basis for the Pound-Rebka
experiment. When produced by cobalt-sixty, this is commonly used to change the color of gemstones. This
radiation was discovered by Paul Villard's experiment in which a photographic plate developed despite
being separated from radium salts by a magnetic field and a lead shield. Having the shortest known
wavelengths in nature, identify this type of radiation labeled by Ernest Rutherford after he had named alpha
and beta.
ANSWER: gamma rays/radiation [prompt on electromagnetic radiation; prompt on EM radiation]
Astronomical missions concerned with these entities include INTEGRAL, which was launched in
2002, and Swift, which was launched in 2004. The Compton Edge results from these entities
scattering off a scintillator during spectroscopy. An optical afterglow characterizes the aftermath of
the emission of these entities, which may be caused by the collision of a neutron star and a black hole.
The only periodic emission of this (*) radiation are from sources called its namesake "soft repeater." This
region of the spectrum is emitted during a namesake burst, which is the brightest known event in the
universe. For 10 points, name this high energy region of the electromagnetic spectrum that is named after a
Greek letter.
ANSWER: gamma rays [accept gamma ray bursts or GRBs or soft gamma repeaters; prompt on "photons" or "high-energy photons"]
They are used both to change the color of topaz from white to blue and in sterilization for their ability to
penetrate and alter living tissue. Produced in radioactive decay or electron-positron annihilation, they are
emitted in namesake bursts when stars collapse to form black holes. FTP, name this type of high-energy
electromagnetic radiation with a shorter wavelength than x-rays, named for the third letter of the Greek
alphabet.
ANSWER: gamma rays
One form of this type of radiation was first observed by the Vela satellites. That form of this type of
radiation is thought to occur when rapidly rotating, high mass stars undergo a supernova or when binary
neutron stars merge. That form is this radiation's namesake bursts. This kind of radiation is not deflect by
magnets and was discovered by Paul Villard. When this type of radiation enters a solid, pair production is
commonly observed. For 10 points, identify this very high frequency radiation that is more penetrating than
alpha and beta radiation.
ANSWER: gamma radiation [or gamma rays]
Although it is not the CMBR, inverse Compton scattering is involved in increasing the energy of
these events. Rees and Meszaros produced the Relativistic Fireball Shock model to explain these
events. It is believed that Wolf Rayet stars are progenitors of the long type of these events while
mergers of neutron stars can create the short type. Approximately one of these events occurs
somewhere in the sky every day. A collapsar that caused one of these has been suggested as a cause of
the Ordovician-Silurian mass extinction, despite the fact that most of them have had their distances placed
at several billion light years.. Modern Satellites used to detect these events include BeppoSAX and Swift,
and they were first detected in 1962 by the Vela Satellites, US satellites designed to detect secret soviet
nuclear weapons tests. FTP, name this cosmologic event where a massive explosion like a super or
hypernova results in a huge jet of the namesake type of electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: Gamma Ray Burst
These things were first reported to the public in a 1973 paper by Klebesadel, et al., and they were
studied by the BATSE instrument on the Compton Observatory. The afterglow of these things was first
detected by the satellite BeppoSAX. One type of these things repeats at regular intervals and that type's
origin is likely magnetars. They were first detected by the Vela satellites. These things are classified into
long and short; the latter is thought to be caused by the merger of binary neutron stars while the former is
likely a result of the core collapse of a rapidly rotating, massive star. For 10 points, identify these most
energetic emissions in the universe.
ANSWER: gamma ray bursts [or GRBs]
The theory that these phenomena result from the deceleration of ultrarelativistic matter, perhaps
resulting from internal shocks, solves the so-called compactness problem. Their spectra can be
described by the Band function. The BATSE experiment searched for these phenomena. Longduration instances of these phenomena are likely caused by (*) hypernova explosions. These
phenomena, which were first detected by the Vela satellites, are followed by longer-wavelength emissions
known as the "afterglow." The "short" variety of these phenomena may be caused by the merger of binary
neutron stars. For 10 points, name these bright electromagnetic events in which extremely high-energy
photons are emitted.
ANSWER: gamma ray bursts (or GRBs)
Experiments currently studying these phenomena include Konus on Wind and a namesake Coordinates
Network that continuously searches for them. These entities are often found in conjunction with type Ic
["one-C"] supernovae. Theories of their origins include the evaporation of primordial black holes, and their
distribution can be explained by the collapsar model. In 2005, the first short one was observed, and that one
was probably caused by the collision of two neutron stars. The satellite BeppoSAX played a role in
mapping their distribution and location, which were first observed by Vela Satellites. They have a
characteristic afterglow and are the most luminous phenomena in the universe. An instance of one near
Earth would probably destroy us all. For 10 points, high-energy discharges of a namesake part of the
electromagnetic spectrum characterize what events?
ANSWER: gamma-ray bursts [accept grbs or gamma-ray bursters]
This man hypothesized a primordial material he termed "ylem." The optimum bombarding energy is
closely related to the peak of his namesake window for tunneling through a Coulomb barrier. He wrote a
series of books in which a bank clerk hunts a very uncertain quantum tiger and rides a bike in a city where
the speed of light is a few kilometers per hour. In addition to writing the Mr. Tompkins books, he predicted
the cosmic microwave background and proposed the idea of a genetic code. For 10 points, name this man
who worked on hot Big Bang nucleosynthesis with Alpher and added Bethe's name to the resulting paper.
ANSWER: George or Georgiy Antonovich Gamow [or Gamov]
In analyzing 31 flybys of this body in 1996, scientist found gravitational anomalies in one, providing
evidence for its lumpy interior, while NIMS detected such ocean salts as magnesium sulfate here in 2000,
supporting the theory of an ocean deep below its surface. The Hubble Space Telescope detected a thin
ozone around this body, and one feature of its surface is the Memphis Facula, which is located within a
large dark region known as the Galileo Regio. This body is the only moon in the solar system with a
magnetosphere. For 10 points, name this Galilean moon of Jupiter, the largest in our solar system.
ANSWER: Ganymede
This moon's chain of thirteen craters, Enki Catena [en-kee kah-TEE-nah], probably was caused by a comet.
Its southern hemisphere contains a large impact basin named Gilgamesh, and its impact crater Memphis
Facula [FAkyoo-lah] is located in its Galileo Regio [REE-jee-oh]. It is the four in the four two one
resonance of the three inner Galilean moons of Jupiter, located outside Io [I-oh] and Europa but closer to
Jupiter than Callisto. Name this largest moon in our solar system.
ANSWER: Ganymede
This object had a hydrogen atmosphere blown away by solar wind and was thought to develop
ridges on its terrain when its neighboring satellite pulled it into an elliptical orbit, squeezing this
moon and rumpling its crust. The Hubble Telescope detected an ozone here in 1995, and the Galileo
spacecraft has detected a (*) magnetic field around this moon, which is stronger than those found on other
satellites. One prominent feature of this moon is the dark plain named Galileo Regio. It is the largest of a
group consisting of Callisto, Io, and others that orbit the same planet. For 10 points, identify this moon of
Jupiter, the largest satellite in the solar system.
ANSWER: Ganymede
In 1995, the Hubble Space Telescope detected the presence of ozone in this satellite's thin oxygen
atmosphere. Its surface has sulci which are a part of this body's associated grooved terrain, and notable
formations on it include the Gilgamesh impact crater and a large oval shaped region of dark terrain, Galileo
Regio. It is the only moon in the solar system to possess a magnetosphere which was discovered by the
Galileo spacecraft. For 10 points, identify this satellite of Jupiter, the largest moon in the solar system
named for the cupbearer of the gods.
ANSWER: Ganymede [accept Jupiter III]
Two large crater impact basins on this entity are named for Isis and Gilgamesh, and the hypothesis that this
entity contains a subterranean saltwater ocean is supported by the light-colored terrain of the Arbela Sulcus.
Having a mantle largely composed of ice, one can find the Memphis Facula inside this entity's largest plain,
the Galileo Regio, and this entity is the only known satellite in the solar system with its own magnetosphere.
This moon's orbit forms a Laplace resonance with those of Io and Europa, and Voyager 2 revealed that it is
actually larger than Titan. For 10 points, name this moon of Jupiter, the largest satellite in the solar system.
ANSWER: Ganymede
This object is home to a light-colored grooved terrain known as Uruk Sulcus, as well as the Osiris
and Tros craters. However, it is the Anat crater on which this object's coordinate system is based.
The grooved surface of this moon may have been the result of tidal heating caused by Laplace
resonances, which would have pushed its orbital eccentricity far above the .0015 value this moon has
today. A saltwater (*) ocean is believed to exist below its sulfate-rich surface, but above the liquid iron
crust, which is the site of convection. The Hubble Space Telescope found a thin ozone atmosphere around
this body, but it is better known for having a strong magnetosphere. For 10 points, name this Galilean moon
of Jupiter, which is also the largest moon in the solar system.
ANSWER: Ganymede
In one model for the formation of these things, they can only form when the Toomre Q parameter is
less than one; their formation may also occur if they fall within a Stromgren sphere. In another
model for the formation of these things, a transition to oligarchic growth occurs when the stirring
ability of large bodies exceeds that of small bodies. That transition occurs sooner in high-metallicity
environments since surface densities are enhanced. If one of these things suffers complete
hydrodynamic escape, it is classified as Chthonian; COROT-7b may be one such body. In the Nice
model, some of these things (*) migrated radially outwards after the Late Heavy Bombardment. These
bodies may have a net outward heat flux arising solely from the Kelvin-Helmholtz mechanism. For 10
points, name these massive planets that have thick atmospheres, like Jupiter.
ANSWER: gas giants [prompt on "(giant) planets"]
This man lends his name to an integration method which finds optimal points described by roots of the
orthogonal polynomial, his namesake quadrature. One unit named for him is equal to ten to the negative
fourth Weber per meter squared. A statement named for him implies the non-existence of magnetic
monopoles. Another statement developed by him yields the universal gravitational law when applied to the
gravitational field and reduces to Coulomb's law for point charges. For 10 points, identify this scientist
whose most famous law states that the net flux through a closed surface is proportional to the charge
enclosed by the surface.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man names a method for solving linear systems of equations with Seidel, as well as a theorem
that relates curvature to Euler characteristic with Bonnet. Replacing the electric field with the gradient
of the potential in a namesake law gives Poisson's Equation, and magnetic monopoles are disallowed by
another namesake law. The Divergence Theorem is named for this man, and he names a law that gives
the electric flux through a surface as proportional to the enclosed charge. For 10 points, name this
German mathematician who names two of Maxwell's equations.
ANSWER: (Johann) Carl Friedrich Gauss
One law named for this person states that the divergence of gravitational field strength is proportional
to mass density. This person's name is sometimes used for the system of CGS [C-G-S] units, and he
is the namesake of the CGS unit of magnetic field strength that corresponds with the MKS [M-K-S]
unit tesla. Another law named for this person, which is incompatible with the existence of magnetic
monopoles, states that a closed surface integral of a magnetic field is zero. Name this famous
mathematician whose flux laws for electricity and for magnetism are two of Maxwell's four equations.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
The formulation of one of this man's laws is equivalent to the statement that magnetic monopoles do
not exist and states that the net magnetic flux out of any closed surface is zero. Another of his laws
states that the total of the electric flux out of a closed surface is equal to the charge enclosed divided by
the permittivity. For 10 points, name this German mathematician and physicist whose namesake equations
form two of Maxwell's equations and who names a magnetic field unit equivalent to 10 to the -4 Tesla.
ANSWER: Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss
One of his equations shows that there is no electric field in any neutrally grounded area, which is why it's
safer to be in your car than outside during a lightning strike. His equations also state that no monopoles
exist in nature, and that most magnetic charges are dipoles. He lends his name to the surface used in finding
electric fields, and he also found the formula for summing a long list of numbers at the age of 8. For 10
points, name this German scientist who contributed two of the Maxwell Equations.
ANSWER: Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss
This scientist published his Arithmetical Investigations at the age of 21, in which he presented the first
known proofs of the quadratic reciprocity law. He had earlier proven the fundamental law of algebra, and
one story posits that as a schoolchild he used a mathematical trick to calculate the sum of the first one
hundred integers. In fields other than mathematics, he names a law relating the distribution of charge to the
electric field. For 10 points, name this German scientist who names two of Maxwell's laws and a theorem in
differential calculus.
ANSWER: Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss
One law named for this man states that the div of E is equal to rho divided by the permittivity. This man
names a theorem of gravity that relates the gravitational flux around a closed surface to the enclosed mass.
This man also names the theorem that states that magnetic monopoles cannot exist. This man's law is the
first of Maxwell's Equations and relates the charge enclosed in one of his namesake surfaces. For 10
points, name this physicist who famously summed the numbers one to one hundred in his head.
ANSWER: Carl Fredrich Gauss
One form of this law is equivalent to Newton's theorem of universal gravitation and allows for calculation
of the gravitational field. Since gravity is a conservative force with zero curl, as are the other forces this law
deals with, the differential form of this law simply becomes Poisson's equation, allowing for the calculation
of both potential and field. Applications of this law usually involve constructing one of its namesake
surfaces around a model object (such as a Bouguer plate) through which flux is measured. A more
commonly seen form of this law can be derived from Coulomb's law through integration and application of
the Dirac delta function, and its differential form states that the divergence of the electric field is
proportional to the charge density. For 10 points, name this theorem whose electromagnetic form is one of
Maxwell's laws, which relates field strength to either mass or charge.
ANSWER: Gauss's Law
The Marder collection and a Poisson solve are used to correct error's in it when running algorithms for
relativistic PIC plasma simulations. The gravitational application of this law can be used to prove the force
of a spherically symmetric object on another can be considered as though both objects were point masses at
their centers. Equivalent to Coulomb's law for static charges, it can be used to derive an equation for the
electric field given a symmetrical charge distribution. For 10 points, name this law that states the net
outward flux through a closed surface is equal to the net charge inside the surface, divided by the
permittivity of free space.
ANSWER: Gauss' Law
This law is often used alongside the method of images when dealing with plate barriers. One
application of this law can be used to show that a person inside a planet is only pulled by the gravity
of the ground beneath him and not above. A modification of one version of this law sets one side of it
equal to mu nought times row m instead of 0 and allows for magnetic monopoles. The differential and
integral forms of this law are equal according the divergence theorem, which was also discovered by this
law's namesake. One version of this law states that the divergence of the electric field is equal to the charge
density over the permittivity of free space; or that the electric flux through a closed surface is equal to the
enclosed charge over the permittivity of free space. For 10 points, give this law, whose electrical and
magnetic versions form half of Maxwell's equations for electromagnetism.
ANSWER: Gauss- law
The application of this theorem usually involves the construction of its namesake surface, such as its
"pillbox." This theorem can be derived from Coulomb's Law by integrating over a Dirac delta
function. In integral form, this expression is usually formulated in terms of a surface integral that is
proportional to the enclosed (*) charge, while its differential version states that the divergence of the
electric field is proportional to the charge density. For 10 points, identify this law, one of Maxwell's
Equations and named for a German scientist.
ANSWER: Gauss' Law
One variation of this law is used to show that, for a smaller body inside a larger body, only the mass
below the smaller body pulls on it gravitationally. This law can be stated as the divergence of E equals rho
divided by epsilon-sub-zero. Another variation of this law, for magnetism, is used to show that there are no
magnetic monopoles. This law makes use of namesake surfaces with symmetries that match the surface of
interest. For 10 points, name this law that relates the electric flux through a surface to the charge enclosed.
ANSWER: Gauss's law
This statement generalized for gravity states that the divergence of a gravitational field equals negative 4 pi
times big G times density, a law which reduces to Poisson's equation. Using this law on an infinite plane of
uniform charge density involves the construction of a namesake "pillbox", an example of a symmetrical
surface. This law, which equates the surface integral of E dot dS with Q over the permittivity of free space,
is the first of Maxwell's equations. For 10 points, name this law which states that electric flux through a
closed surface is proportional to enclosed charge, named for a German physicist and mathematician.
ANSWER: Gauss's Law [or Gauss's flux theorem]
A version of this law modified to use free electric charge can be used to derive Poisson's equation,
while the differential form of this law sets the divergence of the electric field equal to charge density
divided by a constant. The right-hand side of one variant of this equation equals zero, implying the
nonexistence of magnetic (*) monopoles. It is usually easier to use than Coulomb's law to find the electric
field due to a continuous charge distribution. For 10 points, name this law which states that the electric flux
through a closed surface is proportional to the enclosed charge, which is grouped with Faraday's and
Ampere's laws in Maxwell's equations.
ANSWER: Gauss's law
One application of this law sees errors in it accounted for by the Marder correction, and the "magnetic"
form of this law asserts that magnetic monopoles do not exist. Unlike that application of this law, a more
common application yields a result of charge over a constant, and states that the electric flux through any
closed surface is proportional to the electric charge therein. For 10 points, name this one of Maxwell's
equations named after a German scientist who also names the normal distribution.
ANSWER: Gauss's law
First developed in 1908, the important part of this device is a metal tube filled primarily with an inert gas
that conducts small surges of electricity when a certain type of particle is present. There must be a large
electric potential difference between the wire and the outside of the tube so that a burst of current is created
when some gas is ionized. One end of the tube is often covered with mica, which allows the particles being
searched for to enter. FTP name these devices that are often used signify the presence of radiation.
ANSWER: Geiger counter (or Geiger-Muller Tube)
In his early work, he derived the relativistic two-body Bethe-Salpeter equation from field theory, and with
Keith Brueckner, he published an exact formula for the correlation energy of an electron gas at high density.
His work on cosmic rays led to a formula relating charge to isospin, baryon number, and strangeness, which
is named for Nishijima and this man. He predicted the omega minus particle as a result of his work with
Yuval Ne'eman to organize particles based on their symmetric association, known as the eightfold way. For
10 points, name this long-time Caltech physicist who first postulated the existence of quarks.
ANSWER: Murray Gell-Mann
Like Sudarshan and Marshak, and with Feynman, this man posited a vector-minus axial Lagrangian
for weak interactions. This man classified kaons and hyperons by positing the idea of strangeness,
and charge is equal to one-half the hypercharge plus the isospin in a formula named for him and a
Japanese physicist. One system developed by this man was vindicated by the discovery of the omega-minus
baryon. That idea arranged the spin-3/2 baryons into a decuplet and the spin-1/2 baryons into an octet, from
whence it got its Buddhist-sounding name. That theory led to the idea that nucleons were composed of a
triplet of strongly-bound color-charged particles. For 10 points, identify this physicist who developed the
Eightfold Way and the quark model.
ANSWER: Murray Gell-Mann
This name is given to a set of observatories located on Mauna Kea [MAUN-ah KAY-ah] in Hawaii and
Cerro Pachon [SEHR-oh pah-CHONE] in Chile. This is also the name of the program that used Titan
rockets and included Edward White taking the first American spacewalk and Walter Schirra maneuvering
the first space rendezvous. This is also the constellation where the Medusa and Eskimo Nebulas are located.
That constellation is located between Taurus and Cancer. Give this term coming from the Latin word for
twins.
ANSWER: Gemini
One experiment that tested this theory measured the frequency change in a space-borne hydrogen
maser. Another experiment testing this theory bounced radio waves off Venus and is named for
Shapiro. The Mossbauer effect was used to decrease the (*) redshift from recoil of an emitted photon in
another experiment testing it. Another experiment measured the decay in the orbit of a binary pulsar. It was
tested in the Pound-Rebka and Hulse-Taylor experiments, respectively. Calculating the precession in the
perihelion of a planet and using a solar eclipse to measure the change in star positions when they were near
in the sky to the sun where more classical experiments testing this theory. For 10 points, name this theory
concerned with gravity formulated by Einstein.
ANSWER: general relativity [or gravitational redshift; or gravitational time dilation; or gravitational waves; prompt on redshift or time dilation; prompt on relativity]
One attempt to verify this theory is LIGO (LIE-go), which detects a certain type of waves. This theory
explains the Lense-Thirring (LENS-THEER-ing) effect, which is frame dragging around massive objects.
Pound and Rebka confirmed this theory's prediction of gravitational redshift, and it predicts that massive
objects bend light in a form of lensing. This theory describes gravity as the curvature of space-time. For 10
points, name this theory that followed Einstein's theory of special relativity.
ANSWER: theory of general relativity [or general theory of relativity; or GR; prompt on relativity]
One result of this theory was tested in the 2004 GP-B experiment, which tentatively confirmed the geodetic
effect. The equations that govern this theory equate curvature with energy and momentum, represented by
the stress-energy tensor. This theory predicts that objects close to a rotating mass undergo precession, a
phenomenon known as framedragging. It also predicts a phenomenon whereby light is bent by massive
objects, called gravitational lensing. For 10 points, name this theory, which is governed by Einstein's field
equations, and has a "special" counterpart.
ANSWER: general relativity [prompt on relativity; do not accept "special relativity"]
Conservation of energy can be derived from this theory by the use of the Bianchi identity and the properties
of the Ricci tensor. This theory predicts an effect that can result in the formation of a ring named for its
formulator. In addition to gravitational lensing and frame dragging, it successfully predicted the precession
of the perihelion of Mercury. The equations of this theory include terms such as the stress-energy tensor,
space-time curvature, and the cosmological constant. For 10 points, name this theory, according to which
gravity is a consequence of curved spacetime, and which is based on the Einstein field equations.
ANSWER: general relativity [prompt on relativity; do not accept "special relativity"]
The effects that this theory describes can be illustrated by a set of four Bianchi identities and
sixteen coupled nonlinear partial differential field equations, which can be solved using the
Schwarzschild metric. According to this theory, a flat Minkowskian (*) spacetime would be seen in
empty space, and it can be used to explain frame dragging and lensing due to the curvature of space. For
10 points, an accelerating reference frame is equivalent to a reference frame in a certain type of field
according to what theory of gravitational forces proposed by Einstein?
ANSWER: General Relativity [or GR; prompt on relativity]
One test of this theory involved measuring the periastron time of the Hulse-Taylor binary pulsar, and
another used gyroscopes to measure the geodetic drift rate. Alternatives to it include Brans-Dicke theory,
which adds an extra scalar field. Theodor Kaluza added an extra spatial dimension to this theory, which is
built upon ten coupled hyperbolic and elliptic partial differential equations. In addition to frame-dragging,
this theory correctly predicted that the presence of matter curves space-time. A principle central to this
theory is the equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass. For 10 points, name this theory formulated by
Einstein that expanded upon special relativity.
ANSWER: general relativity [prompt on "relativity;" do NOT accept "special relativity"]
Alternatives to this idea include teleparallelism and Brans-Dicke theory, and the Reissner-Nordstrom and
Kerr- Newman metrics are solutions to the fundamental equations of this theory. The Pound-Rebka
experiment tested it by attempting to cancel a Doppler redshift with a blueshift, while effects predicted by
this theory include frame dragging and gravitational lensing. The Ricci tensor is featured on one side of the
Einstein field equations in the equations which govern this theory. For ten points, name this theory of
gravity which has a 'special- counterpart.
ANSWER: general relativity (Prompt on relativity. Do not accept or prompt on special relativity.)
One phenomenon predicted by this theory can only arise from quadrupole sources and is how energy is
emitted from the Hulse-Taylor binary pulsar. This theory successfully accounted for the advance of the
perihelion (pear-ee-HILL-yen) of Mercury. It also correctly explained the bending of light around massive
objects, called gravitational lensing. For 10 points, name this theory which states massive bodies curve
space, developed by Einstein after a similarly-named "special" counterpart.
ANSWER: general relativity [or GR; prompt on relativity, do not accept "special relativity"]
A principle of this theory would be violated by the Nordtvedt effect, which has likely been ruled
out by the Lunar Laser Ranging experiment. A consequence of the use of torsion-free linear
connections in this theory is the Bianchi identities. Under certain conditions, this theory predicts that
particles will precess due to "frame-dragging". The "weak" form of a principle of this theory states
that freely falling particles move on timelike geodesics. This theory accounted for the anomalous
precession of the (*) perihelion of Mercury. A stronger form of that "weak" principle states that all
physical phenomena appear the same in an accelerating inertial reference frame and a uniform gravitational
field. For 10 points, name this theory introduced by Einstein in which gravity results from the curvature of
space-time.
ANSWER: general theory of relativity [or GR; prompt on Einstein's theory relativity; do not accept "special relativity"]
This theory predicts an increase in traveling distance proportional to the negative log of 1 minus R dot x in
an effect named for Shapiro. The left side of an equation that governs this theory includes a term named for
Ricci as well as a term equal to half the metric tensor times the scalar curvature. That equation is solved for
by the Kerr and Schwarzschild metrics. This theory predicts that light will be deflected away from massive
matter through gravitational lensing. For 10 points, this theory describing gravity and the curvature of
spacetime, posited by Einstein and contrasted with a "special" counterpart.
ANSWER: general relativity [prompt on partial; do not accept "special relativity"]
A theorem describing conditions under which these things undergo focusing is used in the derivation
of the Raychaudhuri equation. In a coordinate system named for these things, Christoffel symbols
vanish. Killing vectors are the Noether currents of symmetries along these extremals. For physicallyrealizable ones, which are affinely parametrized by the proper time, its second derivative plus the
sum of all permutations of its first derivatives under the Levi-Civita connection, is zero. Schild's
ladder uses these things to approximate parallel transport along a curve. The rate of separation
between two of these things is proportional to the Riemann curvature tensor. These things lend their
name to an effect measured by (*) Gravity Probe B, in which a nonrotating mass drags vectors along with
it. Massless particles travel along "null" ones, while timelike ones are the world-lines traversed by free
particles. For 10 points, name these paths that generalize the notion of straight lines to curved spacetime,
which see use in a certain architectural construction that approximates great circles on a sphere.
ANSWER: geodesics [prompt on "world-lines"]
A method for distance determination using these objects, which are described by the Plummer
Model, involves comparing the turnover magnitude of a sample to that of a sample from nearby
galaxies. In addition to their namesake luminosity function, these objects, which include 47 Tucanae,
are observed in amounts proportional to their galaxy's luminosities. They are drawn in to the center of
their galaxies by dynamical friction and their age can be determined by their turnoff point on an HR
diagram. Blue Stragglers are inordinately bright and young stars that appear in these collections of old
population II stars that orbit in the halo of every galaxy in the local group. FTP, name these spherical
collections of old stars that are distinguished from the open variety of the same type of object by their old
age.
ANSWER: Globular Clusters
H. C. Plummer's model of these structures has a too-steep fifth power dropoff of the density,
though that model is often used in toy N-body simulations. These formations are sorted by their
central mass density into classes 1 through 12 in the Shapley-Sawyer classification system. The
mean value of the relaxation time of these structures is on the order of one billion years, and
these structures generally remain gravitationally bound, except in the case of strong tidal forces.
Those visible to the naked eye include 47 Tucanae and Omega Centauri, and these formations
are general found outside of the galactic disk proper in a spherical distribution. For 10 points,
name these collections of stars with a roughly spherical shape.
ANSWER: globular cluster
In the Peccei-Quinn theory, which seeks a solution to the strong CP problem, the triangle anomaly involving
these particles spontaneously breaks symmetry and gives mass to the axion. Evidence for the existence of
these particles was deduced from three hadronic jet events with zero total angular momentum using
electron-positron collisions in the PETRA experiment, which also determined this particle's spin. Deep
inelastic scattering of photons off protons reveal that these neutral particles carry away about half of the
proton momentum. Like quarks, these particles are unobservable in the singlet state due to asymptotic
freedom. These spin-1 particles are massless and mediate a force described by the SU(3) symmetry group,
which results in their carrying a color charge. For 10 points, identify these gauge bosons of QCD, which
mediate the strong force.
ANSWER: gluons
The first experimental proof of these particles came from the three coplanar jet experiments performed at
DESY in Hamburg. The eight independent states of these particles can be described by Gell-Mann matrices,
and these particles perform the function originally postulated for pions by Yukawa in a theory described the
SU(3) group. The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider hopes to produce a plasma consisting of a mixture of
quarks and these particles, and a bound state of these particles is known as their namesake "ball." For ten
points, identify these gauge bosons of QCD which carry color charge and mediate the strong nuclear force.
ANSWER: gluons
A device used to characterize these particles was the first superconducting solenoid in the world; that
device showed that these particles are emitted from the decay of the Y(9.46) state as partly predicted
by the Lund string model. The number of these particles can be calculated by finding the dimension
of the adjoint of the special unitary group of order (*) 3, which shows that they come in eight types.
These particles, which were first discovered by the JADE and PLUTO detectors- observation of three-jet
events, are responsible for carrying color charge. The force mediated by these particles is described by
QCD. For 10 points, name these particles that mediate the strong force, named for the fact that they adhere
quarks together.
ANSWER: gluons
A hypothetical particle entirely composed of these particles is difficult to detect because it mixes with
ordinary mesons, and candidates for said particle include f sub J 1710. The first experimental
evidence of these particles was observed at the PETRA facility in 1979 with evidence of three jet
events. In a Feynman Diagram, these are represented by a spiral line. The number of them is equal to
the number of adjoint representations in an SU 3 gauge theory. According to QCD, there are eight types of
this particle, each of which carries one unit of color and one unit of anti-color. For 10 points identify these
subatomic particles, the carriers of the strong force which can act to bind quarks together to form larger
subatomic particles.
ANSWER: Gluons
The q squared term in the first DGLAP equation is derived from the splitting and radiation of these
particles. A solution to the Balitsky-Fadin-Kuraev-Lipatov can be obtained as a series in the number of
these particles emitted with transverse momentum greater than a cutoff, and an odderon consists of three
reggeized examples of them. They were first detected during three jet events at PETRA, and these particles,
which correspond to Gell-Mann matrices, are associated with an SU(3) gauge theory. They do not exist in
the singlet state, so there are eight of them, and these particles can form high temperature plasmas with
quarks. In quantum chromodynamics, these particles are the gauge bosons for the strong force. For 10
points, name these massless particles, responsible for the interactions between quarks and hence binding
together hadrons.
ANSWER: Gluons
The spin of these particles was confirmed experimentally by determining the distribution of the Ellis-
Karliner angle. SCET provides a framework for doing calculations when these particles are at low energies
or moving in the same direction as particles they interact with. The clearest evidence of these particles-
existence came from the decay of a quark resonance into three jet events at DESY's PLUTO experiment,
and they are depicted using a spiral in Feynman diagrams. These bosons and quarks form a namesake
plasma or "soup," and are responsible for an interaction approximately 39 magnitudes more effective than
gravity. For 10 points, identify these gauge bosons which help hold atomic nuclei together by mediating the
strong force.
ANSWER: gluons
Replacing one of these particles with a fermion bubble chain gives rise to renormalon singularities.
The longitudinal structure function "F sub L" is particularly sensitive to the distribution of these
particles since the first non-vanishing term corresponds to their fusion with photons. The field
strength tensor for these particles contains terms for the commutators of different components of its
four-potential. Hadronization events with an odd number of (*) jets provided the first direct evidence
for these particles. On Feynman diagrams, they are represented by spiraled lines. At around 200 MeV, these
self-interacting bosons undergo a phase transition into a deconfined plasma, which may have been produced
at Brookhaven in 2005. Eight types of them exist, and they carry both color and anticolor charge. For 10
points, name these massless particles that mediate the strong interaction and interact with quarks.
ANSWER: gluons
t Hooft-Polyakov monopoles are predicted in these formulations when the second homotopy group of a
certain quotient of the underlying gauge group is non-trivial. That group is SU(5) in the Georgi-Glashow
one, and these formulations must split into the Standard Model gauge under symmetry breaking. These
statements predict proton decay and give bounds on the possible masses of the fermions, and indirect
evidence for them comes from the fact that the gauge coupling of the electroweak and strong forces seems
to have equal strength at around 10 to the 16 GeV, which is known as its namesake scale. For 10 points,
name these proposed physical theories that state that the electromagnetic, weak, and strong forces are
combined into a single field at extremely high energies.
ANSWER: Grand Unification Theories or GUT[accept equivalents containing the word unification]
In wave mechanics it gives the ratio of the square of the dissipation time to the internal wave period.
When this value greatly exceeds the square of the Reynolds number, forced convection effects are
negligible. The product of this value and the (*) Prandtl number yields the Rayleigh number, and it
governs the flow regime in natural convection. For 10 points, name this dimensionless quantity, which
represents the ratio of the buoyancy force to the viscous force acting on the fluid.
ANSWER: Grashof number
When the constant surface mass density is above some critical value in this phenomenon, the source can be
imaged as a circularly symmetric ring with an angular radius known as the Einstein radius. Refsdal showed
how this phenomenon, applied to a variable source, could be used to calculate the Hubble Constant and
giant blue luminous arcs and smaller arclets are the result of distortions generated by it. The micro regime
results in a single brighter image, while the weak regime results in shear and convergence of the image. For
10 points, what is this phenomenon, the strong type of which creates multiple images when the light from a
source such as a quasar is deflected due to the curvature of spacetime by a massive object such as a galaxy
cluster?
ANSWER: gravitational lensing
One form of this behavior gives a tangential effect equal to the mean ratio of dimensionless surface
density minus the same ratio and was first observed in 2000 in four correlated ellipticities. This
process can ne used to construct a parameter-free projected distribution via a Kaiser-Squires
inversion. Shear and stretching due to this behavior produce effects known as (*) arclets. A version of
this effect is being used to search for compact dark matter and massive compact halo objects and is referred
to by the prefix micro-. One object exhibiting this effect is a quasar in the constellation Pegasus; the
fourfold symmetry of the image of that object has led to its nickname, Einstein's Cross. This effect was first
measured by Eddington during a solar eclipse. For 10 points, name general relativistic effect in which
massive objects bend the trajectory of light.
ANSWER: gravitational lensing [prompt on lensing]
The Kaiser-Squires inversion is used in observations of this phenomenon to reconstruct mass
distributions. The OGLE and MOA projects use this phenomenon, and in particular detect this
phenomenon within Baade's window of the Zone of Avoidance. The galaxy cluster Abell 370 is
known for the arcs caused by it. The "Old Faithful" QSO 0967+561 double (*) quasar was the first
object found to be imaged twice due to this phenomenon. The micro- version of this phenomenon is used to
detect extrasolar planets, and it is responsible for Einstein rings. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which light is bent due to the curved spacetime around a massive object.
ANSWER: gravitational lensing
The weak version of this phenomenon is decomposed into convergence and shear forms, and
variation in this phenomenon due to orbital motion is called xallarap. This process was observed in
SBS 0957+561 A and B, which are identical. Extrasolar planets are detected through one version of
this phenomenon by the OGLE and MOA projects. This phenomenon creates an angle of 4GM over r
c squared, and its observation of this phenomenon in the Bullet Cluster is strong evidence for (*) dark
matter. This phenomenon results in the creation of Einstein rings, and it results from the curvature of
spacetime. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which beams of light are bent by massive objects.
ANSWER: gravitational lensing [accept weak lensing, strong lensing, or microlensing]
The Xallarap effect is an alteration in the observation of this phenomenon caused by the motion of
the source. The MOA experiment is studying this phenomenon in relation to dark matter. The galaxy
cluster Abell 2218 is one of the most notable sources of this phenomenon, which is used by the
PLANET network to detect extrasolar planets. The first observation of this phenomenon was dubbed the
"Twin Quasar." An Einstein Cross can be created by this phenomenon, while the Einstein Ring occurs when
the observer, the source of the light, and an extremely massive object are all along a straight line. FTP,
name this relativistic effect in which a very massive object such as a galaxy bends light around itself like a
certain optical device.
ANSWER: Gravitational Lensing
The OGLE, MOA , and PLANET experiments are based on the measurement of this effect, and the
utility of data obtained using this effect is limited by the mass sheet degeneracy. Steitz and Schneider
improved on a method used to recovering the mass distribution from data obtained from this effect,
which is usually done using Kaiser-Squires inversion. The angle created by this effect is equal to four
GM divided by RC squared. Walsh, Carswell and Weymann were the first to observe this effect in
the Twin quasar. This effect can be used to find MACHOs and extrasolar planets; specifically, the microversion of it. An object named for Huchra generates the Einstein cross via this effect, which is caused by the
curvature of space. For 10 points, name this effect, in which light is bent by gravity.
ANSWER: Gravitational Lensing
There is an upper limit on the amount of these that can be produced during D-brane inflation, due to a
bound on maximal field variation. LISA will eventually work on detecting these Ground-based sensors for
detecting these must be isolated from all seismic disturbances, the most sensitive of which are currently
located in Louisiana and Washington, called LIGO. Einstein predicted their existence as part of his General
Theory of Relativity, and the 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics was given to two Princeton astrophysicists for
their discovery of a pulsar that exhibits these. For 10 points, identify these energy ripples throughout the
universe, most commonly produced by binary star systems.
ANSWER: gravitational waves [accept gravity waves, gravitons, and gravitational radiation]
These phenomena are believed to be responsible for the predicted polarization anisotropy of the cosmic
microwave background. One possible path to detection of these phenomena is the observation of growing
perturbations of spinning neutron stars, an effect known as the Chandrasekhar-Friedman-Schutz instability.
The amplitude of these tensor phenomena is given by the second time derivative of the quadrupole source
term in the post-Newtonian method of analyzing them. Evidence for these phenomena includes the orbital
shrinking of binary systems such as the Hulse-Taylor pulsar, and these objects are being sought by both the
Large Interferometric Space Antenna and the LIGO project. For 10 points, identify these tensor
perturbations predicted by general relativity which represent emissions of energy from massive systems.
ANSWER: gravity waves [accept word forms as well as gravitational radiation]
Emitters of these phenomena can be used as standard sirens, and they can only be emitted by
quadrupole sources. One proposed way of detecting them used three satellites linked by lasers, while
another proposed method was to use a cryogenically cooled and isolated bar of metal free from
outside vibration. Indirect evidence for their existence comes from the measured loss of energy from
the (*) Hulse-Taylor binary system. Another experiment to find them uses a large two-armed
interferometer and is called LIGO. They are emitted by non-symmetric rotating systems and possible
sources for them include two black holes merging. For 10 points, name these as-of-yet undetected
phenomena predicted by general relativity, a form of radiation given off by massive bodies.
ANSWER: gravitational waves [or gravity waves]
One method to detect these phenomena is a 68 centimeter sphere cooled to 20 millikelvin, while
another one designed by Thorne, Drever, and Weiss consists of an L-shaped Michelson
interferometer with Fabry-Perot cavities. Besides the miniGRAIL experiment, another apparatus
used to detect them is a series of aluminum cylinders isolated from outside vibrations, named for
Joseph Weber. The orbital decay of the Hulse-Taylor binary system is predicted to be due to these
phenomena radiating energy away from the system, and they are radiated by accelerating, non-spherically or
cylindrically symmetric system. The LIGO experiment attempts to detect, for 10 points, these phenomena
predicted by general relativity.
ANSWER: Gravitational Waves
The existence of these phenomena is shown by Bondi and Feynman's "sticky bead argument".
The tensor-to-scalar ratio of these phenomena was recently discovered to be 0.2 by the BICEP2
collaboration. The existence of these entities was shown indirectly by observations of PSR 1913 + 6,
whose orbital decay matched the predictions of the energy of these phenomena; that work was done
by Hulse and Taylor. BICEP2 inferred their existence from B-modes of the (*) CMB. Attempts to
detect these entities include an apparatus in Livingston, Louisiana consisting of an interferometer with long
Fabry-Perot arms, called LIGO. For 10 points, name these phenomena predicted by general relativity,
which are ripples in spacetime caused by the weakest of the fundamental force.
ANSWER: gravitational waves [or gravitational radiation; or gravity waves]
One success of string theory, in which these are closed strings able to move between branes, is the
fact that it resolves infinities that arise when combining these with the Standard Model at high
energies. With current technology, these cannot be directly observed, though the LIGO and VIRGO
experiments are presently trying to observe their associated waves. For 10 points, name this hypothetical
particle with spin two, the carrier of the weakest of the four fundamental forces, gravity.
ANSWER: graviton [prompt on "gravity wave" before "wave"]
Mordecai Milgrom has proposed a version of this interaction called MOND. The field theory of this
interaction is non-renormalizable, which has led to such attempts to model this interaction as Roger
Penrose's twistor theory. This interaction is thought to be mediated by a spin-2 massless boson, and
experiments such as LISA intend to search for waves produced by this interaction, which deflects light in a
process known as its namesake lensing effect. In the Newtonian regime its force is given by a universal
constant times the product of the masses divided by the distance squared, and it is described on large scales
by the general theory of relativity. For 10 points, identfiy this fundamental interaction arising from the
attraction between massive objects.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitation; accept obvious word forms]
This phenomenon's namesake darkening causes stars to appear brighter at their poles. This
phenomenon was used to predict the existence of Neptune by John Couch Adams and Urbain Le
Verrier based off of the movements of Uranus. Objects influenced by this force travel in geodesics. It
can also form an (*) Einstein lens around large masses such as stars. For 10 points, name this weakest of
the four fundamental forces, supposedly discovered by Newton when an apple fell from a tree.
ANSWER: Gravity
Doppler redshift associated with this force was measured by the Pound-Rebka experiment, and waves
associated with this force are being searched for by the LIGO project. The constant associated with this
force was first measured by Henry Cavendish, and it is caused by spacetime curvature in general relativity.
This force between two objects can be calculated as the products of their masses over radius squared times
its namesake constant, and on Earth, acceleration due to it is approximately 9.8 meters per second squared.
For 10 points, name this fundamental force that gives objects weight.
ANSWER: Gravity [accept Gravitational Force; do not accept "Weight"]
One theory of this force states that it exists as a spin network, which leads to the idea that space is
quantized. The LIGO project is designed to detect "waves" of this force that is responsible for a kind of
redshift. The velocity required to overcome this force is known as the escape velocity. The potential energy
due to this force is directly proportional to an object's height. Weight is equal to the mass times the
acceleration due to, for 10 points, what force that generally keeps your feet on the ground?
ANSWER: gravity
Indirect evidence for waves that carry radiation of this type was provided by the Hulse-Taylor binary
pulsar. Newton's concept of "action at a distance" implied that this could have an infinite speed. The
bending of light due to it is known as its namesake lensing. It is caused by the curvature of spacetime in
GR. On the earth's surface, 9.8 meters per second squared is the acceleration due to this. For 10 points,
name this weakest of the four fundamental forces, which depends upon an object's mass.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitational]
Hoyle-Narlikar theory explains this phenomenon using Mach's principle. A binary pulsar named for Hulse
and Taylor is believed to emit waves named for this phenomenon, whose detection is sought by the LIGO
experiment. This force is mediated by a hypothetical spin-2 particle. Henry Cavendish used a torsion
balance to measure its namesake constant, and this force is the weakest of the four fundamental interactions.
The acceleration due to this force equals 9.8 meters per second squared. For 10 points, name this attractive
force that causes objects to fall toward Earth.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitation; or gravitational force]
The quantum variety of this entity is described by the Wheeler-DeWitt equation. The Hulse-Taylor binary
pulsar was found releasing waves named after this force, which can be detected using instruments such as
LISA or a Weber bar. The stress-energy tensor is responsible for this force in one theory, and an attempt to
measure this force using a torsion balance was the Cavendish experiment. According to General Relativity,
this force is a result of spacetime curvature, and Newton devised an inverse-square law to measure its
strength. For ten points, name this attractive fundamental force that causes objects to fall to the ground
when dropped.
ANSWER: gravity
On the moon, mascons are areas where this type of anomaly is present. In geophysics, its strength is
related to an object's moment of inertia by MacCullagh's formula. Faye's formula gives the
difference in values of this phenomenon that is induced by free-air anomalies. Models with anomalies
in the strength of this phenomenon can be calculated in a formula given by Bouguer. The
equipotential surface of this force which gives the (*) mean sea level is known as the geoid. The distance
at which tidal forces will overcome this other force is known as the Roche limit. Isostatic equilibria are
made between a balance between the lithosphere's buoyancy and this other force. For 10 points, name this
force, which causes a downward acceleration of most objects equal to 9.8 meters per second squared.
ANSWER: gravity [accept gravitational force and other word forms.]
One problem in modern physics is that this phenomenon cannot be renormalized in quantum field theory,
and this interaction is carried by a spin-2 gauge boson. Particles only affected by this force move along
geodesics due to its equivalence principle, and a constant associated with this force was measured with a
torsion balance in the Cavendish experiment. In general relativity, this force results from the curvature of
spacetime, and it is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between two bodies. For 10 points,
name this force that causes an acceleration of about 9.81 meters per second squared on Earth, first described
by Isaac Newton.
ANSWER: Gravity [accept equivalents such as Gravitational Force]
Because this force is non-renormalizable, generating a quantum field theory of it is impossible. Radiation
generated by this force requires a quadrupole (KWAH-droo-POLE) source. One constant that defines this
force was measured using a torsion balance by Henry Cavendish; that value is equal to 6.67 times 10 to the
negative 11. This force bends spacetime according to general relativity. For 10 points, name this force
described by Newton's inverse-square law, the attractive force between two bodies.
ANSWER: gravity
One phenomenon likely caused by this force has been detected in the shrinking orbits of the Hulse-Taylor
pulsar. Attempts to detect that phenomenon caused by this force include the LISA and the LIGO projects. A
value associated with this force was first measured by testing the angle of rotation of a torsion balance. That
experiment was performed by Henry Cavendish, and this force's namesake constant is 6.67 times 10 to the
negative eleven Newton meters squared over kilograms squared. For 10 points, name this force which
attracts masses to one another.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravity waves; or gravitational waves]
Physical evidence of this phenomenon is searched for by TAMA300, Geo600, VIRGO, and LIGO.
Einstein rings are created by lensing, or bending of the light, by it. Propagating at the speed of light, it is
considered the curvature in space-time in general relativity. This phenomenon was studied by Galileo at the
Leaning Tower of Pisa and becomes exponentially high near black holes. For 10 points, name this attractive
fundamental force, which on Earth causes objects to accelerate at 9.8 meters per second squared.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitational force; or gravitational waves]
This phenomenon's namesake "darkening" and "brightening" occur when a star rotates at high speeds, and
gives stars an oblate spheroid shape. Its carriers are theorized to have coherent states detectable by
instruments like LIGO. A research team in China controversially discovered that the speed of this force
exceeds the speed of light. Considered the curvature in of spacetime in general relativity, an inverse-square
law was proposed for the strength of this force by Isaac Newton. For ten points, name this force, which on
Earth yields an acceleration of 9.8 meters per second squared perpendicular to the ground.
ANSWER: gravity
According to one theory of this phenomenon, free particles move along geodesics. That theory also predicts
that this phenomenon will cause light to be redshifted. The equivalence principle asserts that this
phenomenon and inertia behave identically.This non-thermal phenomenon must be present for convection to
occur. This phenomenon, which is not described by GUTs, is treated as a consequence of the curvature of
spacetime in general relativity. Newton described this interaction as an inverse-square force. For 10 points,
name this weakest of the fundamental forces, which causes an acceleration of 9.8 meters per second squared
on Earth.
ANSWER: gravity [or word forms]
Calculations involving this force can be improved by using the Bouguer (boo-JAY) or free-air
corrections. An equipotential surface for this force is the geoid (JEE-oyd), the shape the oceans
would take if they covered the Earth. A constant used in calculations with this force is equal to (*)
6.67 times 10 to the minus 11. Because the Earth is an oblate spheroid, calculations involving this force
deviate from Newton's law. For 10 points, name this attractive force that causes things to flow or fall
towards the Earth's center.
ANSWER: gravity
This force is described by the Schwarzschild metric. This force is theorized to be carried by a massless,
chargeless particle with a spin of 2. Lagrange points indicate locations where this force achieves
equilibrium. An inverse-square law describing this force was published in the Principia. An object's mass
determines the magnitude of this force on an object, which is called weight. For 10 points, name this purely
attractive force that, on Earth, causes objects to fall to the ground.
ANSWER: gravity
The impact of this force on wavelength was the subject of the Pound-Rebka experiment, which
demonstrated the relationship between this force and the Doppler effect. Joseph Weber created bars
to detect waves associated with this force. The equivalence principle based on this force became
the basis of the general theory of relativity, which extended special relativity to account for this
force. Objects affected by this force have a period described by Kepler's third law, and an attraction
described by Newton's universal law. Name this force that explains the attractions between any two
objects with mass and why we are pulled toward the Earth.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitational force]
One theory attempts to describe this force by adding a scaling function labeled mu. Unlike MOND,
some modern theories claim that it is carried by a massless, spin 2 particle. Above the Chandrasekhar
limit, electron degeneracy pressure is overcome by this force and, by the (*) shell theorem, it is equal to
zero inside of a spherically symmetrical shell. It is equivalent to acceleration according to the equivalence
principle and it is caused by the warping of spacetime. Einstein's theory of general relativity replaced the
older description of this force developed by Newton. For 10 points, name this force that attracts all objects
with mass.
ANSWER: gravity
The source of this force is the stress-energy tensor, a second-rank tensor that suggests that the particles that
mediate this force must be massless spin-2 particles. In string theory, the aforementioned particles are
described as closed strings in a low energy state. Its namesake waves are radiated during interactions
between large masses, and a quantum theory of this could allow for the formulation of a "theory of
everything." The namesake potential energy is equal to the amount of work necessary to bring an object
from infinity to a given radius. For ten points, name this weakest fundamental force, which causes a
downward acceleration of 9.8 m/s on Earth.
ANSWER: gravity
The Pound-Rebka experiment confirmed the existence of a red shift associated with this force. The
potential energy associated with this force is equal to the kinetic energy at an object's escape velocity.
It is proportional to the product of the (*) masses of two objects over the square of the distance between
them by Newton's Law of Universal [this]. For 10 points, name this weakest of the four fundamental forces,
a theory of which was supposedly devised by Isaac Newton after an apple fell on his head.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitational force; or gravitational red shift until "red"]
One equation for discovering this value multiplies the masses of two objects over the radius squared
multiplied by this force's universal constant. When this weakest of the four fundamental forces is equal to
the drag force on an object, that object will be at a terminal velocity. An object's weight is equal to mass
multiplied by this force. For 10 points, name this force that acts as a downward acceleration on an object on
Earth at 9.8 meters per second squared, which was studied by Isaac Newton possibly because of an apple.
ANSWER: gravity
The free air and Bouguer methods are ways to measure anomalies in this phenomenon, first
discovered due to Meinesz's accurate measurements of it at sea. The Airy and Pratt models concern an
equilibrium of this force known as isostasy, and erosion caused by this phenomenon is labeled slumping,
mass wasting, or creep. Granular materials that form a slope steeper than the angle of repose will likely
erode due to this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that determines the course of
rivers, an inverse-square attractive force between masses.
ANSWER: gravity
Orest Khvolson studied one phenomenon caused by this force, which explains an optical effect
centered on the Huchra galaxy. The redshift caused by a field of this force was measured in the
Pound-Rebka experiment, and this force causes appearance of (*) Einstein rings. The n-body problem
only considers objects affected by this force, which is central to the theory of general relativity. This force's
magnitude is inversely proportional to distance-squared, according to Newton's Universal Law of it. For ten
points, name this force that keeps Earth in orbit around the Sun.
ANSWER: gravity
In particle physics, the effect of this force on particles is mediated by the hypothetical Higgs Boson, and is
itself carried by a hypothetical massless, chargeless particle. The kinetic energy of a body matches the
potential energy associated with this force at the escape velocity. Two constants associated with this force
are symbolized by lower- and uppercase letter Gs, the latter of which is found in a "Universal Law," as it is
constant on all planets. FTP, name this force that brought an apple down on Newton.
ANSWER: Gravity (Accept word forms like Gravitation)
An effort to reconcile this phenomenon with quantum mechanics led to the idea shared by string theory that
the information inside a volume can be contained on its surface, the holographic principle. Its ability to
deflect light was confirmed in 1919 by Arthur Eddington, giving strength to the theory of general relativity.
General relativity improved on the theory put forth in the Principia that this has an inverse square relation
with distance and requires two objects with mass. Name this force that keeps planets in orbit and keeps us
near the ground.
ANSWER: gravity (accept gravitation, prompt on "relativity" or "general relativity")
This force is described as a consequence of spacetime curvature in general relativity. Henry
Cavendish used a torsion balance to measure a constant associated with this force. That constant
associated with this force equals about 6.67 times ten to the negative (*) eleventh power in standard SI
units. This is the only force acting on an object in free fall. Newton developed a "universal law" of this
force. For 10 points, name this force that attracts all objects with mass to each other.
ANSWER: gravity [accept gravitation; accept weight]
The reciprocal of the black hole entropy, called the Immirzi parameter, appears in a "loop" theory of
this force. Objects influenced by this force travel along geodesics. The Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector is
a constant of motion resulting from this force, whose strength is the subject of the heirarchy problem.
The Kepler problem in the study of this force has only one exact modern solution, named for (*)
Schwarzschild. This force can cause the appearance of additional images due to intervening galaxy clusters
in a phenomenon known as "lensing." For 10 points, name this force described by an inverse-square law
with the product of each object's mass in the numerator, a law developed by Newton.
ANSWER: gravity [accept loop quantum gravity before "loop" is read]
Projects like LIGO are searching for hypothetical waves caused by this force. The Standard Model predicts
that this force is carried by a massless, spin-2 particle, though it has yet to be observed. Unlike the other
fundamental forces, this one cannot be renormalized in quantum field theory, leading to alternate theories of
its operation like string theory. The principle of equivalence says that the effects of this force are
indistinguishable from acceleration. For 10 points, name this force described by general relativity, the
attraction that occurs between any two massive objects.
ANSWER: gravity
This is the only fundamental force whose gauge boson has not yet been observed. The distortion of
light from an astronomical object as it travels towards the observer is known as this type of lensing. A
torsion balance was used to measure this force's namesake constant by Cavendish, and near the earth's
surface, this force causes objects to accelerate at 9.8 meters per second squared. For 10 points, identify this
fundamental force, the attraction occurring between massive bodies.
ANSWER: gravity [or word forms; or gravitational force]
A quantum field theory of this phenomenon is impossible because it is not renormalizable. This
phenomenon is a result of the warping of spacetime according to general relativity. A constant equal
to 6.67 times 10 to the negative 11 is multiplied by two masses and divided by the distance between
them squared in (*) Newton's universal law of it. Another constant named for this weakest of the four
fundamental forces is 9.8 meters per seconds squared. For 10 points, name this downward force that
determines the weight of objects.
ANSWER: gravity [or word forms thereof; accept gravitational waves in the first sentence]
This phenomenon's namesake waves are being searched for by the LIGO experiment. The
equivalence principle equates inertial mass to mass caused by this phenomenon. An experiment that
measured a constant of this force used two lead balls and a torsion balance, and was performed by
Henry Cavendish. In general relativity, it is described as spacetime curvature, and acceleration due
to (*) it on Earth is 9.8 meters per second squared. For 10 points, name this solely attractive fundamental
force that arises between massive objects.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitational force]
Spin foam serves as a model for 4-geometries used to dynamically observe the quantum form of this force.
Mossbauer spectroscopy of an iron-57 gamma emitter was used to measure Doppler redshift associated with
this force in the Pound-Rebka experiment, and two lead balls were used to construct a torsion balance to
measure the magnitude of this force in the Cavendish experiment. Conceptualized by wells in spacetime, for
10 points, identify this weakest fundamental force that causes objects in the air to accelerate to Earth at 9.8
meters per second squared.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitational force; accept equivalents]
Evidence for waves produced by this force has been gathered by observing orbits of close binary pulsars,
and Arthur Eddington was the first to observe the bending of light by this phenomenon, called its namesake
"lensing". Transmitted by a yet-undetected particle that has zero rest mass, this inverse-square force of
infinite range is modeled by the equation F equals G times m sub one times m sub two divided by r squared,
where G is a constant measuring 6.67 x 10-11 Newton meters squared per kilogram squared. For 10 points,
name this weakest of the four fundamental forces that Isaac Newton supposedly experienced when watching
an apple fall.
ANSWER: gravity or gravitation
One theory of this phenomenon replaces a constant with a variable scalar field, the Brans-Dicke model. The
balance between outward radiation and this phenomenon acting inwardly on a body is known as the
Eddington luminosity, and the bending of light due to this phenomenon is known as its namesake lensing.
This force, which Einstein visualized as the curvature of spacetime in his field equations, is proportional to
the inverse square of radius and the product of two masses according to a universal law named for Newton.
For 10 points, name this weakest of the fundamental forces that causes objects to accelerate on Earth at 9.8
meters per second squared.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitational force]
This is the only fundamental force whose mediating boson is yet to be discovered, and measuring the
effects of this force is a way to locate dark matter. Einstein visualized this force by imagining curved
space-time, and the universal law of this force states that F equals (*) G M1 M2 divided by r squared.
On Earth, the magnitude of acceleration due to this force is approximately 9.8 meters per second squared,
and this force is what keeps planets in orbit around the sun. Apocryphally discovered when Newton was hit
in the head by an apple, for ten points, what is this force, which causes us to fall back to Earth when we
jump up in the air?
ANSWER: Gravity (accept equivalents)
This phenomenon is modeled by a scalar field and a tensor field in Brans-Dicke theory. The Hulse-Taylor
binary pulsar emits its namesake waves, the subject of the LIGO study. In QFT, it is mediated by an
uncharged, massless, spin-2 particle, but that approach fails at the Planck scale. Using a torsion balance,
Henry Cavendish measured its characteristic constant, which is the proportionality constant in an inversesquare law named for Newton. It is the weakest fundamental force and its potential energy is given as mgh,
where g = 9.8 meters per second squared. For 10 points, name this attractive force which pulls objects
towards the center of the earth.
ANSWER: gravity or gravitational force
The result of the Cavendish experiment was used to calculate a constant of proportionality for this
force. It is explained in terms of space-time curvature by general relativity. This weakest of the four
fundamental forces is always (*) attractive, with a value proportional to the product of the masses of two
objects. Weight is the amount of this force acting on a given object. For 10 points, name this force whose
acceleration on earth is 9.8 meters per second squared, downward.
ANSWER: gravity (or gravitation)
A particle not yet experimentally confirmed that mediates this force would have spin equal to two.
This force emerges as a consequence of spacetime (*) curvature in the theory of general relativity. The
nature of this force was investigated in an experiment conducted by Galileo featuring balls rolling down
inclines. For 10 points, name this force accounted for in an inverse square law named for Newton.
ANSWER: gravity
Binary pulsars are theorized to lose energy through this force. Forces due to this force are
indistinguishable from those due to inertia according to the equivalence principle. It is a result of the
curvature of space-time according to Einstein's general relativity. This force's universal constant was
first measured using a (*) torsion balance in the Cavendish experiment and is equal to 6.67 times 10-11. Its
universal law was first proposed by Newton and it causes an acceleration of 9.8 meters per seconds squared
on Earth. For 10 points, identify this force which causes attraction between bodies in proportion to their
mass.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitation; accept word forms]
Of the four fundamental forces, this one is excluded from the grand unified theory. The Cavendish torsion
balance is used to measure the constant associated with this force. That constant of proportionality for this
force, whose strength was determined by Newton, is approximately 6.67 times ten to the negative eleventh
newton meters squared per kilogram squared. Name this force that attracts massive objects to each other,
especially bodies down to earth's surface.
ANSWER: gravity
This phenomenon is hypothesized to be mediated by a mass-less particle with spin-two, and the Einstein
field equations describe this phenomenon. General relativity predicts that this weakest of the four
fundamental forces is caused by curved spacetime. Newton used Kepler's laws to show that this force
follows an inverse square law. This force is multiplied by mass to calculate weight. On Earth, this quantity
is equal to 9.8 meters per second squared. For 10 points, name this attractive force, which is the reason why
objects fall towards the Earth.
ANSWER: gravity [accept gravitation; prompt on "g"]
One theory of this force posits that quantum excitations in its underlying field form lines of force, which
close up to form loops. Sources of light in areas where this field is strong will appear redshifted to an
observer in an area where this field is weak. Any accelerating body can generate this type of wave, whose
detection is the goal of LIGO. General relativity posits that this force is the result of the curvature of
spacetime. Theories of everything attempt to unify this weakest of the 4 fundamental forces with
electromagnetism, the weak, and the strong forces. Its universal constant has units of Newtons meters
squared per kilogram squared. For 10 points, name this fundamental attractive force between objects with
mass.
ANSWER: gravity [accept word forms like gravitational force/field/waves etc]
John Moffat has developed a nonsymmetric theory of this, while Renate Loll and others have developed of
a theory of this phenomenon that makes use of pentachorons, and is called causal dynamical triangulation.
Another theory of this interaction has two fields and coupling constant called omega, while a different
theory depends on the Immirzi parameter. Along with Brans-Dicke theory, and a theory developed by
Mordehai Milgrom called MOND, there are recent theories like quantum loop theory that attempt to
quantize this interaction, which is mediated by spin-2 particles. FTP, identify this interaction which can be
described in terms of the curvature of space-time, and whose inverse-square law was developed by Isaac
Newton.
ANSWER: gravitation (OR gravity OR other word forms)
This force can be derived mathematically with the Einstein Field Equations, which describe how an
object causes a curvature in spacetime. A constant associated with this force was first accurately derived
from an experiment that used a torsion balance and was conducted by Henry Cavendish. This force is
always attractive. An inverse-square law for it was presented in the Principia. For 10 points, identify this
force whose universal law was originally formulated by Sir Isaac Newton.
ANSWER: gravity
Stars can appear to be brighter at their poles in this phenomenon's namesake darkening. The Eotvos
experiment concerned this force, whose balancing point with outward radiation is the Eddington limit. Its
namesake waves were reported by Hulse and Taylor, and its namesake constant was first measured using a
torsion balance by Cavendish. General relativity has supplanted Newton's model of this force, which treated
it as an inverse-square phenomenon. With its namesake acceleration on earth about equal to 9.81 meters per
second squared, name this weakest fundamental force, which is exclusively attractive and acts between
objects with mass.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitation, etc.; accept gravity brightening or gravity darkening]
This force is theorized to be a result of both a scalar and a tensor field in the Brans-Dicke (BRANS
DICK-ee) theory. This force leads to a result called the weak equivalence principle. Like the
electromagnetic force, it is classically represented by an inverse-square law. Its effects are said to be caused
by spacetime curvature in the theory of general relativity. For 10 points, name this force whose universal
constant is labeled big-G.
ANSWER: gravity [or gravitation; or gravitational force]
A calibration used by Kates and Weigelt makes models containing this entity less favorable, while
Lynden and Bell's work in analyzing velocity fields led them to suggest its existence. The Shapley
concentration is approximately 10 times its size, and it is located beyond Hydra-Centaurus. Evidence
for its existence came from (*) CMB observations of the motion of the Local Group, as accounting for the
Virgo Supercluster alone left residual components. Abell 3627 may be near its center, and data suggests it
may be a supercluster. For 10 points, identify this entity, which draws the Milky Way and other galaxies
towards it.
ANSWER: Great Attractor
The Rayleigh-Ritz variational method relies on an upper bound calculation for the energy associated with
this, and the Ritz correction for quantum defects of alkali metals is maximized in this configuration. Due to
symmetry, it is the only state not affected by the Stark Effect in Hydrogen. For a quantum harmonic
oscillator, the energy associated with this is one half Planck's Constant times the frequency, and this is the
most populated state in a Bose-Einstein condensate. For ten points, name this quantum state, the state with
the lowest available energy, often compared to excited states.
ANSWER: ground state
Exotic ones include a composite of two hyperons as well as glueballs. The dissimilar masses of the rho and
pi varieties suggest the masses of these particles do not correlate to the masses of their components. The
generators of the group that governs their interactions are one-half times the eight Gell-Mann matrices. That
group, SU(3), describes quantum chromodynamics, so called because the bosons that hold them together
transmit color charge. Typically composed of two or three quarks, these are, FTP, what class of subatomic
particles that includes the J/psi particle, the neutron, and the proton.
ANSWER: hadrons
The Corbino effect is related to this other physical effect, but it describes the flow of charges in a circular
disk. This effect can occur in a plasma, but its namesake parameter, the ratio between electron
gyrofrequency and collision frequency, can then exceed one. It has spin and quantum varieties, but in its
basic form it describes the effects of the Lorentz force acting on charges moving in a magnetic field. FTP,
identify this electromagnetic effect, in which a perpendicular current generates a namesake voltage by
causing moving charges to accumulate on one side of a conductor.
ANSWER: Hall effect
Devices that take advantage of this phenomenon often contain indium arsenide and are used to measure
magnetic flux density, which has applications for understanding the Earth's magnetic field and in anti-lock
braking systems. Spin-orbit interaction leads to the spin type of this phenomenon, while the more common
type of this phenomenon can be used to differentiate between n- and p-type semiconductors and is
equivalent to the magnetoresistance effect. Name this potential difference transverse to an electric
conductor created in a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect
At low enough temperatures, graphene exhibits the quantum spin variety of this effect, and the Corbino
effect is observed by using a disc-shaped metal sample instead of a rectangular one. Its namesake parameter
may be computed by the van der Pauw method , while in plasma, that parameter is equal to the ratio of
electron gyrofrequency and particle collision frequency. Klaus von Klitzing discovered the exact
quantiziation of its parameter in the quantum version of this effect. For ten points, name this effect, the
production of a transverse voltage difference across a current-carrying conductor in a perpendicular
magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect
The type of thruster named for this effect traps electrons, neutralizing what would be positively-charged
material pushed out of it. This effect is used to measured electron mobility, and its coefficient equals
mobility times resistivity. The voltage created by this effect, which is zero on a Corbino disk, varies
inversely with the product of charge density and strip thickness. Its voltage also varies directly with
the product of current and magnetic field strength. Name this effect created when a conducting strip
carrying a current is placed into a magnetic field, pushing the electrons towards one side.
ANSWER: Hall effect [or Hall voltage]
Righi and Leduc are the namesakes of this effect's thermal analogue. A magnetic field is generated by the
angular momentum of electrons in the spin form of this effect, and the magnetization of ferromagnets is the
cause of its anomalous form. This effect's namesake coefficient can be measured using the van der Pauw
method. Corbino devised a geometry to measure this effect in circular disks. Klaus von Klitzing discovered
the quantum form of this effect, which comes in integer and fractional types. For 10 points, name this effect
in which a voltage difference develops between the sides of a conductor when placed in a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect
This effect is useful in power sensing because it performs analog multiplication, and in plasmas its
coefficient is equal to the gyrofrequency divided by the heavy particle collision frequency. A Jet of xenon
gas is used in a type of thruster that uses this effect, while one version of it can be observed in MOSFETs,
when its namesake voltage becomes quantized and which can be used to define the von Klitzing constant.
Its namesake coefficient is the ratio of the applied electric field to the product of the current density
measured times the applied magnetic field. Originally used to find the sign of charge carriers, for 10 points,
name this effect that produces a voltage difference across an electric conductor transverse to the electric
current.
ANSWER: Hall effect
This effect shifts the equipotentials by an angle equal to B times the conductivity over n times e times
the speed of light. For ambipolar conduction, this effect's strength is directly related to the number of holes
minus the number of electrons times b squared. The conductivity created by one type of this effect is equal
to the filling factor times the fundamental charge squared over h. That effect was discovered by von
Klitzing. The current times the strength of the magnetic field over the number density of electrons times the
fundamental charge times the plate's thickness gives the velocity caused by this effect. For 10 points, name
this effect that causes a voltage difference across an electrical conductor due to a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect
A circular version of it is called the Corbino effect, and it can be measured using the Van der Pauw method.
Used in a type of spacecraft thruster, two versions of it differ in whether the filling factor nu is integral or
rational. A thin copper film can be used as a namesake probe, to measure large magnetic fields on the order
of one tesla. With thermal, spin, and quantum varieties, it occurs because the Lorentz force pushes charge
carriers to one side of the conductor, producing a measurable voltage. Used to determine the sign of the
charge carriers, for 10 points, name this effect in which a perpendicular potential difference arises in a
current-carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect
One form of this phenomenon involves tying cyclotron frequencies to degenerate Landau levels, and is
performed on gallium arsenide interfaces, although it was recently discovered in room-temperature
graphene. A class of low-impulse spacecraft ion thrusters are based on and named for this phenomenon. A
filling factor for a type of this phenomenon multiplies a standardized resistance. That factor was found to
take on rational values, which earned Klaus von Klitzing the Nobel Prize. The inverse of the carrier density
is proportional to this effect's namesake coefficient. For 10 points, name this physical effect, the voltage
difference across a conductor in a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect [accept spin Hall effect; accept quantum Hall effect after "cyclotron"]
This effect is exhibited in an oscillatory pattern in the Shubnikov de Haas effect, and its magnitude
can be measured by connecting symmetrical contacts in the van der Pauw method. A secondary
current can be induced in a circular metal disk in one variant for it named for Corbino. Klaus von
Klitzing discovered integral changes in resistance in a MOSFET, which is the "quantum" form of this and it
can be used to show that electrons serve as charge carriers. For 10 points, name this effect wherein a
magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the flow of a current results in a potential difference in a
transverse direction, named for its American discoverer.
ANSWER: Hall effect [accept Quantum Hall]
The magnitude of this effect and the sheet resistivity can be measured simultaneously in the
four-contact van der Pauw method. The constant characterizing the process underlying this effect can then
be written as one over the quantity fundamental charge times sheet density times sheet resistance - that
quantity is the constant of proportionality between the charge drift velocity and applied electric field and is
known as the mobility. This effect can be explained by considering the Lorentz force on a drifting charge
carrier, so its sign determines the majority carrier in semiconductors. The magnitude of this effect scales
with applied magnetic field, so it can be used to make sensitive magnetometers. For 10 points, name this
electromagnetic effect, the creation of a voltage gradient perpendicular to an applied current in a
magnetized material.
ANSWER: the Hall effect
An analog of this effect was discovered by Corbino, while Dyakonov and Perel formulated one version
dependent on spin. In another version of this effect, electrical conductance is found to be any integer v times
the elementary charge squared over Planck's constant. That quantized version of this effect, which is mostly
found through experimentation on gallium arsenide, was expanded on by Laughlin but was first discovered
by von Klitzing. Caused by a Lorentz force creating an unequal distribution of charge density, for 10 points,
name this effect in physics where a potential voltage is created across a conductor by a perpendicular
magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect
In one version of this phenomenon, its namesake conductivity takes on values equal to the elementary
charge squared over Planck's constant, a quantity which is multiplied by either a fractional or
integral value. Another version of this phenomenon can be used to measure the charge carrier
density, since it arises as a consequence of the Lorentz force law applied to those particles. Its
namesake quantity is proportional to the product of current and (*) magnetic field, divided by the
thickness of the plate and charge carrier density. For 10 points, name this effect in which a magnetic field
perpendicular to a current induces a voltage difference perpendicular to both.
ANSWER: Hall effect
The Corbino effect is a variant of this effect in a circular geometry. This effect can be measured along with
the resistivity and mobility using the van der Pauw technique. When the collision frequency is much lower
than the Larmor or cyclotron frequency, its namesake coefficient is one over the charge density. The
current definition of the ohm is based on a variant of this effect discovered by Klaus von Klitzing known as
its integer quantum version. The sign of the charge carriers in a current can be determined using, FTP, this
effect in which a transverse voltage develops across a current-carrying conductor placed in a crossed
magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect
This effect can be used to calculate the number of free electrons in a wire by measuring the drift
velocity. A quantum version of this effect was discovered by Klaus von Klitzing. When measuring
this effect, a namesake (*) probe is calibrated using a known magnetic field strength. This effect can
distinguish between negative charges moving in one direction and positive charges moving in the other,
because the voltage differences will be opposite in magnitude. For 10 points, name this effect in which an
applied magnetic field causes a voltage difference.
ANSWER: Hall effect
A variant in metal disks in which secondary currents are produced is named for Corbino and along with
sheet resistance, the van der Pauw technique measures this effect in semiconductors. While the associated
voltage is normally negative, in some metals like beryllium it is positive meaning that the charge carriers
involved are holes instead of electrons. A consequence of the Lorentz force, it occurs when the charge
carriers interact with a perpendicular magnetic field. For 10 points, identify this effect where charge carriers
of a current are pushed to one side of a conductor in a magnetic field creating a voltage.
ANSWER: Hall Effect
Tsui and Stormer verified one variety of this effect predicted by Laughlin to occur in quasiparticles, and the
SPT and APT thrusters make use of it. Chern numbers are generated in one type of it, and this effect is also
used to find hole density in a conductor. In plasmas, the parameter for it is given by the ratio of the
gyrofrequency to the particle collision frequency. Klaus von Klitzing discovered a variety of it in
MOSFETS which is quantized. This effect is used to determine the sign of the charge carriers in a
conductor, and results due to the deflection of charge carriers by the Lorentz force. FTP, identify this effect
in which a magnetic field perpendicular to an electric current produces a voltage across the conductor.
ANSWER: Hall effect (accept quantum hall effect before "plasmas")
In ferromagnetic materials, a version of this effect occurs in which the resultant resistivity predicted by this
effect contains an additional zero-field term proportional to the magnetization. Arranging two solid-state
elements which demonstrate this effect at right angles to each other and summing their output voltage to
eliminate the noise is a typical way of producing a magnetic field sensor using this effect. This effect is
derived by noting that the current crossed with the magnetic field creates a transverse current, which results
in a potential difference. For ten points, identify this classical effect in which charge flowing across a
transverse magnetic field results in an electric field component orthogonal to both the current and the
magnetic field, often used to measure the sign of charge carriers.
ANSWER: Hall effect
One analog of this phenomenon is described by the Righi-Leduc effect. Kane and Mele developed a model
for one variety of it and the Corbino effect is a special case of it. In plasmas, its namesake parameter is the
ratio of electron gyrofrequency to the particle collision frequency, and a version of this effect was
discovered in a gallium arsenide heterostructure by Tsui and Stormer and explained by Laughlin. The
resistance associated with this effect t can be measured by the Van der Pauw method and its quantum
analogue, which breaks down into integer and ractional varieties, was discovered by von Klitzing. Resulting
from an asymmetric distribution of charge density, which in turn creates an electric field, for 10 points,
name this effect, in which a potential voltage is produced in a conductor in the presence of a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Hall effect (accept thermal Hall effect until 'Kane-)
One result of this effect was explained by the creation of quasiparticles in a quantum fluid by Laughlin, and
Dyakonov and Perel predicted a version of it dependent on spin. It can be used to find hole density in a
semiconductor, and von Klitzing showed that under certain situations this effect is quantized. This effect
distinguishes between a negative current and a positive current flowing in the opposite direction, and it
creates a Lorentz force, resulting in the deflection of charge carriers by a magnetic field. For 10 points,
name this effect in which a potential difference is created across a conductor by a perpendicular magnetic
field.
ANSWER: Hall Effect [accept fractional quantum Hall effect or quantum Hall effect]
In 2005, Rikken, Strohm and Wyder observed this effect in phonons, proving its existence for
uncharged particles. This effect can be quantified via the van der Pauw technique, and the mechanism
behind it is the Lorenz force. The "quantum" version of this effect is quantized in multiples of Planck's
constant over the square of the charge on an electron. For 10 points, name this effect in which the
application of an external magnetic field to a current-carrying conductor results in the generation of a
voltage gradient.
ANSWER: Hall effect
The quantum spin type initially proposed by Kane and Mele was developed based on Haldane's graphene
model and was realized in mercury telluride quantum wells in 2007. This phenomenon is largely brought
about due to the effect of the Lorentz force. That force leads to a dearth of mobile charge on one side of the
material resulting in a difference in potential across it. For 10 points, identify this effect that describes the
presence of voltage across a conductor caused by a perpendicular magnetic field acting on a current in the
conductor.
ANSWER: Hall effect
One technique for measuring the coefficient of this effect for a sample is to use an arrangement
with four contacts named for van der Pauw. A type of spacecraft thruster named for this effect
ionizes a gaseous propellant and then expels it using an electric field. In a semiconductor, the
coefficient of this effect must take the hole mobility into account. In the inversion layer of a field
effect transistor, the energy levels induced by this effect are quantized, as predicted by (*) von
Klitzing. Its coefficient is inversely proportional to the carrier density, and this effect offers proof that
carriers are negatively charged. For 10 points, name this effect in which a transverse voltage appears in a
conductor when a magnetic field is applied.
ANSWER: Hall effect [accept more specific answers like quantum Hall effect, fractional quantum Hall effect, integer quantum Hall effect, etc.]
The first Chern numbers provide the allowed integer values for the filling factor, and the spectrum of the
almost Mathieu operator consists of these values. Plotting this spectrum produces a fractal figure called
Hofstadter's butterfly. It occurs when the degeneracy of the Landau levels becomes large in the presence of
an external magnetic field and can be used to calculate the fine structure constant and to calibrate
resistances in terms of von Klitzing's constant. For 10 points, name this physical effect in which a
quantized resistance is induced in an electric conductor by an external magnetic field.
ANSWER: quantum Hall effect
Duncan Haldane developed some namesake pseudopotentials that can be used to model this effect.
This effect was partially explained by a predictive wavefunction developed by Robert Laughlin, and
topological insulators can exhibit its "spin" type. The two major varieties of this effect are
determined by whether the (*) filling factor has a fractional or integer value. This effect describes how, in
two-dimensional electron systems, conductivity takes on discrete values equal to multiples of e squared over
Planck's constant. For 10 points, identify this effect discovered by Klaus von Klitzing, analogous to a
classical effect in which a current transverse to a magnetic field creates a voltage difference.
ANSWER: the quantum Hall effect (accept integer quantum Hall effect or fractional quantum Hall effect or quantum spin Hall effect; prompt on "Hall effect")
This effect manifests in a difference in angle between the current density and electric field in
short samples, such as the Corbino disc geometry. Using a square of semiconductor, with
contacts at the corners where measurements are taken of resistivity and this phenomenon, the
mobility and sheet density of a majority carrier can be determined by the van der Pauw (POW)
method. Its conductivity, for certain conditions, is quantized at integer or rational fraction
multiples of fundamental charge squared over Planck's constant, so it is used to define the Ohm.
Due to the deflection of moving charges, the Lorentz force underlies it. For 10 points, name this
effect that is the production of a potential difference due to the influence of a magnetic field
transverse to current.
ANSWER: fractional quantum Hall effect
Fragments of this celestial body fall to Earth as the Orionid meteor shower. The European Space
Agency launched the Giotto probe to study this object in 1986. This object, predicted to appear in
2061, is depicted on the (*) Bayeux Tapestry and appeared for the birth and death of Mark Twain. For 10
points, name this celestial body with a roughly 75 year period, a comet named for an English astronomer.
ANSWER: Halley's Comet
Humphrey Lloyd confirmed this man's prediction of the existence of conical refraction in biaxial crystals,
while his namesake equations are often written in symplectic form. A different equation involves his
namesake characteristic function symbolized W, and automatically gives all constants of motion, and is
named for this man and Jacobi. His namesake equations calculate the time derivatives of generalized
momenta and generalized coordinates. His namesake variational principle is a general version of the
principle of least of action, and states that the time integral of the Lagrangian has a stationary value. For 10
points, name this scientist who discovered quaternions, and whose namesake function is the total energy of
a system.
ANSWER: William Rowan Hamilton
A partial differential equation partially named for this man sets a namesake quantity equal to the
negative time derivative of the action. That equation is named for this man and Jacobi. This man's
namesake principle is a refinement of the principle of stationary action. Applying this man's
namesake operator to the wavefunction of a system gives i h bar times the partial of the wavefunction
with respect to time according to the (*) time-dependent Schroedinger's equation. In classical mechanics,
a function named for him can be obtained by a Legendre transform on the Lagrangian. For 10 points, name
this Irish mathematical physicist who revised Lagrangian mechanics, gave his name to the operator
representing the total energy of a system, and invented quaternions.
ANSWER: William Rowan Hamilton
This operator applied to a wave function is, according to the time-dependent Schrodinger equation, related
to the partial time derivative of a wave function. The energy eigenvalues of a system can be found by
applying this operator to a wave function. If the geometric phase is zero, then this function is real in
systems where it changes slowly with respect to time, or adiabatic systems. Used to define systems in terms
of generalized coordinates and generalized momenta, it is equal to the Legendre transform of the
Lagrangian. For 10 points, name this function equal to the sum of a system's kinetic and potential energy
and named after an Irishman.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian [or H]
When this quantity is independent of the time, action-angle coordinates can be used. The derivative
of this quantity with respect to the slow coordinates appears in the Langevin equation. The time
derivative of an operator is equal to an expression involving the commutator of the operator with this
quantity according to Ehrenfest's theorem. An eigenstate of this operator are unchanging under a
slow (*) perturbation under conditions meeting the adiabatic theorem. This operator taken on a
wavefunction is equal to energy times the wavefunction according to the Schrodinger equation. For 10
points, name this operator which corresponds to the total energy of a system, and which is also equal to the
Legendre transformation of the Lagrangian.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian [accept total energy until mention]
The derivative of a certain quantity with respect to some parameter is given as the expectation value
of the derivative of this operator according the Hellmann-Feynman theorem. The interaction picture
of quantum mechanics expresses this function as a sum of it's free and interaction component.
Observables are constants of motion if they commute with this operator, because the time derivative
of an operator is proportional to the commutator of that operator with this one, according to the (*)
Heisenberg equation. The time evolution operator is the exponential of this operator times negative i t over
h-bar. Performing a Legendre transformation on the Lagrangian gives this function, which is potential plus
kinetic energy. For 10 points, name this function that represents the total energy of a system.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian
A vector field of this type can be defined on a Poisson manifold, and the equations that lead to this grant
that in any arbitrary phase space of dimension 2n, the density of the distribution of position and momentum
in phase space must be constant, a result known as Liouville's theorem. Ordinary differential equations of
this type can be found by finding a formula such that the derivative of the formula with respect to the first
variable equals the derivative of the second variable with respect to time, and that the derivative with
respect to the second variable equals the negative of the derivative of the first with respect to time. In
quantum mechanics, this operator is equal to the momentum squared over two m plus the potential, and is
often equal to the total energy, though in particular it is an extension of the Langrangian. For 10 points,
name this quantity, central to an alternative to Lagrangian and Newtonian mechanics, conserved in systems
to which it applies and designated H.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian
In physics, this term refers to an even-dimensional system of differential equations in which the generalized
momenta are proportional to the derivative of a certain function with respect to the generalized velocities,
and vice versa. This adjective describes a non-abelian group whose subgroups are self-conjugate. The
Bondy-Chvatal theorem and the Dirac theorem both give conditions necessary for a graph to be described
by this word, while an operator named by this word is the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian. For ten
points, identify this word which in physics describes an operator that is the sum of the potential and kinetic
energies and in computer science a path on a graph which visits every vertex exactly once.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian
The fact that this object commutes with the translation operator in a periodic system is a key
step in the proof of Bloch's theorem. The negative derivative of this quantity with respect to p is
equal to the time derivative of p, and the derivative of this quantity with respect to p is equal to
the time derivative of q, in one system. The eigenvalues of this operator are assumed to change
slowly under a perturbation in the adiabatic theorem. The time derivative of the action plus this
quantity is equal to zero according to an equation partly named for Jacobi. In classical
mechanics, this value can be obtained by taking the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian. For
10 points, name this mathematical function used to define a namesake type of mechanics, which
corresponds to the total energy of a system.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian
The Thiemann operator is a candidate for this type of constraint, which would describe kinematics in
quantum loop theory. Vector fields described by this adjective are obtained by rotating the gradient field
components ninety degrees, and are important for determining equations of motion in phase space.
Ehrenfest's theorem relates the time derivative of an observable with the commutator of this operator with
that observable's operator. Cycles of this type touch every vertex of a graph once before returning to the
starting vertex. When applied to wavefunctions, the operator of this type yields energy eigenvalues. For 10
points, give this term describing an operator that equals the sum of kinetic and potential energy, named for
an Irish mathematician and represented by a capital H.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian
A "clamped nuclear" one is employed by the Born-Oppenheimer approximation. Liouville's theorem
demonstrates that it is the Noether charge corresponding to time translation invariance, and in quantum
mechanics, it is a Hermitian, and therefore its eigenvectors generate a basis for its Hilbert space. Any
smooth real-valued function on a symplectic space defines one, leading to an alternate derivation of the
system that uses it, which often employs the Poisson bracket. FTP, identify this quantity, namesake of a
reformulation of classical mechanics, which represents a system's total energy and is the Legendre transform
of the Lagrangian.
ANSWER: Hamiltonian mechanics
Considering each atom in a solid as one of these yields the Einstein model of heat capacity. Via
Taylor expansion around a local minimum, this model may be applied to any system with a nonvanishing 
second derivative of potential. Systems of this type can be classified by their Q value as (*)
underdamped, critically damped, or overdamped, and their frequency is given as the square root of quantity
stiffness over mass. Found in all systems with a linear restoring force, for 10 points, name this simple
system exemplified by a mass on a spring.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator [or SHO]
The energies for the potential of one type of this system are equal to two times the number of loops of
the wavefunction minus one. That wavefunction for one type of this system contains the terms one over the
square root of two raised to the n times n factorial. The energy levels for that type of this system are related
to n plus one-half times h-bar omega. The wavefunction for that system contains the Hermite polynomials
and models a simple diatomic molecule. The square root of the spring constant over m is equal to the
angular frequency of one type of this system. For 10 points, a displaced mass at the end of a massless
spring is an example of the simple type of what system?
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator [or simple harmonic oscillator; or quantum harmonic oscillator]
A quanta of energy is added to one of these systems when a creation operator is applied to it, and solutions
of these are given by Hermite polynomials. The energy eigenvalues of these systems can be found using the
ladder method, and h-bar omega over two is equal to the minimum energy level of the quantum version of
these systems. The angular frequency of these systems is given by the square root of the quantity stiffness
divided by mass, and these systems can experience damping. For 10 points, name these systems which have
a restoring force proportional to displacement, examples of which include pendulums and mass-spring
systems.
ANSWER: Simple Harmonic Oscillators [accept Quantum Harmonic Oscillators]
One deviation from this ideal system is mathematically described by an equation that includes a term
proportional to the cube of position, where the proportionality constant is less than zero in the "soft" case.
That equation is the Duffing equation. Another deviation from this ideal system is mathematically
described by an equal that includes a term proportional to the time derivative of position, where the
proportionality constant is known as the damping coefficient. This system itself is described by a
second-order differential equation formed by equating Newton's Second Law and Hooke's Law. For 10
points, sinusoidal motion is typical of what kind of system exemplified by pendulums and
masses-on-springs?
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator [or SHO; or simple harmonic motion; or SHM; or mass-on-aspring until "masses"; or pendulum before mentioned; prompt on harmonic oscillator]
The Rodrigues formula and Hermite polynomials figure into the analytic method for finding the
wavefunctions of these systems. The allowed energies for these systems can be calculated using the ladder
operators. A quantity determining peakedness for energy graphs of these systems is the dimensionless
quality factor. Their behavior can be split into transient and steady-state motions when they are subjected to
a sinusoidal driving force and a simple damping force, and they exhibit resonance at certain frequencies.
For 10 points, name this kind of system whose periodic, sinusoidal motion is described by Hooke's law,
examples of which include a mass on a spring and a simple pendulum.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator [or SHO; prompt on "spring" or "pendulum"]
The 3-dimensional isotropic quantum version of this system can be used to model electrons in a metal
and has eigenfunctions involving the Laguerre polynomials. The 1-dimensional quantum form of this
system has Hermite polynomials for eigenfunctions and one can use ladder operators to find that the
ground state energy is the reduced Planck's constant times angular frequency. The classical version
of this system is often compared to an (*) RLC electrical circuit and the Q factor relates the damping
constant to the frequency. Solutions to them feature sinusoidal motion and, in the simplest case, their
potential energy is proportional to one half times the displacement squared. For 10 points, name this type of
system that obeys Hooke's law, exemplified by pendulums and masses on springs, which are referred to as
the "simple" type.
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator [accept quantum harmonic oscillator; accept simple harmonic oscillator; accept QHO; accept SHO; prompt on partial answers]
The equation of motion of these systems can be solved from a second order homogenous differential
equation, and they can be used to characterize more complicated systems through Fourier analysis. One
example is an LC circuit, which consists of an inductor and a capacitor. Unlike the damped and driven
varieties of these, the motion of these is always perfectly periodic, and in LC circuits the angular frequency
is given by one over the square root of the inductance times the capacitance. FTP, name these systems in
which energy is conserved and whose motion can be described in terms of a sine function, such as a
pendulum or spring.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillators (accept equivalents of oscillator, prompt on "harmonic oscillator," accept "damped harmonic oscillator" before "LC")
The wavefunctions for this system are proportional to the inverse square root of two to the n times n
factorial times a Gaussian times a Hermite polynomial. The zero-point energy of this system is equal to 1/2
times h-bar times omega. A particle in a potential minimum can be modeled using this system by Taylor
expanding the potential and keeping the 2nd-order term. When this system's 2nd order differential equation is
inhomogeneous, it is said to be "driven," while when there is a nonzero first derivative term, damping
occurs. In this kind of system, acceleration is linearly proportional to displacement. Name this kind of
system exemplified by a mass attached to a spring.
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator [accept "simple" or "quantum" harmonic oscillators, accept word forms like simple harmonic motion and abbreviations like QHO or SHM]
Bertrand's theorem states that stable orbits can only occur for coulomb potentials and these types of
potentials. Potentials of this type possess energy eigenstates of h-bar times omega times the quantity n
plus one-half and can be solved algebraically by using raising and lowering operators. These objects
can be described with a second-order differential equation which equates Newton's Second Law and a
displacement times Hooke's constant. For 10 points, identify these objects that experience a restoring force
when displaced from their equilibrium point, examples of which include masses on springs and pendulums.
ANSWER: quantum [or simple] harmonic oscillators [prompt on partial answers]
In the quantum equivalent of this physical system, phonons can be used to represent excitations.
An RLC circuit is the electrical equivalent of these physical systems. The motion of these systems can
be inhibited in a process called (*) damping. In one of these systems, the displacement is directly
proportional to the restoring force, which is stated as F equals negative k x in Hooke's law. For 10 points,
name this type of physical system exemplified by a mass on a spring.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator [or SHO]
The eigenstates of the quantum version of this system are given by the Hermite polynomials. The Q
factor for one of these systems is given by one half of the damping ratio, while the potential energy
stored in another type of this system is given by one-half k times the (*) displacement distance squared.
The force exerted by that type of this system is given by negative the spring constant times the
displacement. For 10 points, the simple version of what system is governed by Hooke's Law and models a
spring?
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator [or simple harmonic oscillator; or damped harmonic oscillator]
This man gave John Preskill a baseball encyclopedia after losing a bet regarding his namesake
radiation from black holes, and this man proposed a new model of the universe's shape with Jim
Hartle. He tries to make advanced physics accessible to the layperson in books like (*) George's Secret
Key to the Universe and The Universe in a Nutshell, but is more famous for a work which only includes one
equation, A Brief History of Time. For ten points, name this wheelchair-bound theoretical physicist, who,
due to his tracheotomy, has to speak through a voice synthesizer.
ANSWER: Stephen Hawking
One phenomenon named after him is due to pair-production, in which virtual particle containing negative
energy creates an illusion of radiation. Since 1979, he has held the post of Lucasian Professor of
Mathematics at Cambridge, an office that was also held by Isaac Barrow and Isaac Newton. With Roger
Penrose he proved that Einstein's Theory of General Relativity implies that space and time began with a Big
Bang. FTP, name this theoretical physicist who suffers from Lou Gehrig's disease.
ANSWER: Stephen Hawking
The temperature named for this person is similar to the Unruh [un-ruh] Temperature, though it is based on
gravitational field strength rather than acceleration. He worked closely with Roger Penrose, applying
Penrose's work on singularities to the state of the universe before the Big Bang. This person's later work
led to predictions that Black Holes would eventually use up their energy and vanish because they emit his
namesake radiation. Name this scientist who suffers from ALS and wrote A Brief History of Time.
ANSWER: Stephen Hawking
Along with James Hartle, this physicist is the namesake of the wave equation of the universe. Additionally,
his name is sometimes attached to a paradox involving the loss of quantum mechanical property
information, which is not allowed by quantum theory. This paradox may have been solved by taking into
account the radiation field of a black hole. This scientist is also the namesake of a possible process that
lowers the energy of black holes. Name this physicist who theorized that black holes emit radiation.
ANSWER: Stephen Hawking
In a 2007 paper, this man explained inflation using the no boundary proposal with volume weighting. Along
with Hartle, this man names a proposal for the initial state of the universe. This man published a paper with
Roger Penrose that argued the universe started with a singularity. The chapter "Black Holes Ain't So Black"
appears in a book by this man, who is also the namesake of the radiation emitted by black holes. For 10
points, name this theoretical physicist who wrote A Brief History of Time despite being wheelchair bound as
a result of the disease ALS.
ANSWER: Stephen Hawking
With Thomas Hertog, this physicist suggested top-down cosmology as a way to address the anthropic
principle. With Jim Hartle, this physicist suggested that the universe, despite being finite, has no
spacetime boundary. The association of a temperature with every solution of the Einstein field
equations that contains a causal horizon is named for him and for Gibbons. The (*) trans-Planckian
problem arises in considering a phenomenon predicted by this physicist; pair-production near the event
horizon of a black hole, a process named for Penrose, can cause the emission of his namesake radiation. For
10 points, name this recently retired Lucasian Chair, a British theoretical physicist.
ANSWER: Stephen William Hawking
A Rindler observer near a Cauchy horizon sees an analogue of this phenomenon due to the Unruh effect.
The power of this phenomenon decreases with increasing source mass, implying that currently-evaporating
sources must be small. Its associated temperature is proportional to the surface gravity of the source, and it
arises when one particle from a pair production event tunnels out through the event horizon. For 10 points,
identify this type of thermal radiation that causes mass loss in black holes, named for the British physicist
who wrote A Brief History of Time.
ANSWER: Bekenstein-Hawking radiation or effect [prompt on "black-body radiation"]
Near the Cauchy horizon, a Rindler observer will see an analogue to this phenomenon in the Unruh effect.
Its namesake temperature is proportional to the surface gravity of its source. The size of bodies in which
this phenomenon originates must be small, because increasing mass decreases the power of it. It happens
when a particle resulting from pair production tunnels through the event horizon. The no-hair theorem
mandates that this phenomenon be in a mixed state, even for the input of a pure quantum state, a result at
odds with Liouville's theorem that results in an "information paradox." This phenomenon eventually leads
to black hole evaporation. For 10 points, name this thermal radiation named for the author of A Brief
History of Time.
ANSWER: Bekenstein-Hawking radiation [prompt on black-body radiation]
This quantity's namesake equation can be stated as "partial derivative of u with respect to time equals alpha
times Laplacian of u." For a system in which this quantity is zero, pressure times volume to a certain index
is constant. The partial of this quantity with respect to entropy equals temperature. Its flux is proportional to
the temperature gradient according to Fourier's Law for one method of its transfer. The change in internal
energy equals this quantity minus work. In an adiabatic process, this quantity is kept constant. It is
transferred by convection, conduction, and radiation. For 10 points, name this form of thermal energy.
ANSWER: heat [prompt on "thermal energy"; do not accept "temperature"]
One law named for Isaac Newton describes the rate of transfer of this quantity, which does not
change in adiabatic [ay-dee-uh-BAA-tik] processes. Without additional work it can only flow in one
direction according to the (*) second law of thermodynamics. Because it is a type of energy, it is often
measured in joules, and can also be measured in calories. For 10 points, name this quantity that can be
transferred by convection, radiation, or conduction.
ANSWER: heat (or thermal energy; prompt on energy before it is mentioned; do not accept temperature)
An equation named for this man and Kramers gives the cross section for the inelastic scattering of a photon
by an electron. Wavefunctions are time-independent while operators acquire time dependence in this man's
picture of quantum mechanics. This man used the exchange interaction in his Hamiltonian modeling
ferromagnetism, and along with Born and Jordan, he developed the matrix formulation of quantum
mechanics. This man's most famous accomplishment states the product of two standard deviations is greater
than or equal to h-bar over 2. Name this German physicist, who stated that position and momentum cannot
simultaneously be known in his uncertainty principle.
ANSWER: Werner Heisenberg
This man proposed the "explosion shower" theory of cosmic rays, and along with Durr and Weizsacker, he
introduced the concept of symmetry to atomic systems. A namesake idea of his can be used to find the width
of spectral lines and to show that a particle confined to a finite space must have kinetic energy; that idea
includes the conjugate pairing of time and energy based on the matrix mechanics that this scientist
developed with Born and Jordan. Name this physicist who stated that the precise position and momentum of
an electron cannot be known simultaneously in his uncertainty principle.
ANSWER: Werner (Karl) Heisenberg
This man was a member of the Uranium Club during World War II, and a group named for him contains 3
by 3 upper triangular matrices with ones on the diagonal. Equivalent to Schrodinger's wave formulation, a
theory he developed along with Max Born and Pascual Jordan represents physical observables by matrices
and is called matrix mechanics. Derived from matrix mechanics, a relation named for this physicist implies
that his namesake pairs, such as energy and time or position and momentum, do not commute. That relation
is one of quantum mechanics- most
well-known results. For 10 points, name this German physicist, best known for his Uncertainty Principle.
ANSWER: Werner (Karl) Heisenberg
A thought experiment named after this person involves a microscope designed to measure electrons. The
group named after this physicist is a set of matrices [MAY-truhsees] helpful in demonstrating
commutativity [kuh-MYOOtuh-tiv-uh-tee] in quantum mechanics and consisting of upper triangular
matrices with ones on the main diagonal. The idea he is best known for can pair different components of
angular momentum or can pair energy with time as conjugate variables. Name this scientist whose
namesake principle states that it is not possible to measure both position and momentum arbitrarily closely
at the same time, his uncertainty principle.
ANSWER: Werner Heisenberg
Along with Max Born and Pascual Jordan, this man proposed a formulation that is the basis of
Dirac's bra-ket notation and is equivalent to (*) Schrodinger's wave formulation. This man's
formulation is called matrix mechanics (*), a definition of quantum mechanics that was the first complete
and correct definition. Among his other achievements, this man won a Nobel Prize in 1932 for his work that
helped lead to the discovery of the allotropes of hydrogen. However, he is most famous for a principle that
states the determination of position and momentum contains errors of a product less than Planck's constant.
For ten points, name this physicist, known for his namesake uncertainty principle.
ANSWER: Werner Heisenberg
The group named for this physicist is one of the simplest examples of sub-Riemannian geometry. This man
proposed a thought experiment which involves a microscope that uses high-energy gamma rays. This man
proposed that the proton and neutron were different states of the nucleon, leading to the concept of isospin.
The best known statement of this man was formalized by Earle Hesse Kennard and Hermann Weyl.
Independently of John Archibald Wheeler, this man developed a construct that relates initial and final states
of a system undergoing scattering, which is the S-matrix. With Born and Jordan, he introduced the matrix
formulation of quantum mechanics. One of his best known statements limits the precision with which the
position and momentum of a particle can be known simultaneously. For 10 points, name this German
physicist who developed a namesake uncertainty principle.
ANSWER: Werner Karl Heisenberg
Robertson generalized this statement to any Hermitian operators. One attempted refutation of this
statement concerns letting a photon escape, then re-weighing a box named after Einstein. This
theorem sets one side equal to the reduced Planck's constant over two, which is less than or equal to
the product of a certain function applied to two (*) non-commuting variables, like energy at time. For
ten points, identify this theorem, one formulation of which states that both position and momentum of a
particle cannot be known simultaneously, formulated by Werner Heisenberg.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle (accept things like Heisenberg principle before his name is mentioned)
A generalization of this statement to arbitrary operators gives an inequality featuring one half the
magnitude of the expectation of the commutator of those two operators. That generalization of this
statement is named for Robertson and is a special case of a statement named for Schroedinger.
Thought experiments such as a box lined with mirrors from which one photon is allowed to escape
were used in a series of debates between Bohr and Einstein over this principle. One of these exists for
any pair of noncommuting (*) observables, while considering the evolution of an arbitrary operator allows
one to find one of these for energy and time. For 10 points, name this principle of quantum mechanics
which in its original formulation states that you cannot precisely know a particle's position and momentum
at any given time.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
This result can be derived by taking the Fourier transform of a Gaussian wavepacket and using the CauchySchwarz inequality, and it is equivalent to the non-commutativity of two operators. Einstein's slit and box
thought experiments attempted to challenge it, and the modern formulation of this law states that the
product of its two central quantities must be greater than or equal to Planck's constant over two. For ten
points, name this law of quantum mechanics, whose most famous consequence states that the exact position
and momentum of a particle cannot be simultaneously known.
ANSWER: Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
Everett and Hirschmann formulated a stronger version of this statement involving the Shannon entropy.
Robertson generalized this statement to arbitrary Hermitian operators. This statement can be formulated for
any two observables with nonzero commutator, and the original formulator of this statement demonstrated it
with a thought experiment wherein one tries to look at an electron with a microscope. A result of this
statement is that the pulse of a struck drum has a well-defined instance in time but occurs over a large range
of frequencies. The lower bound in this inequality is h-bar over 2, and one form of this statement relates
energy and time. For 10 points, name this principle whose most familiar form states that position and
momentum cannot be simultaneously known to arbitrary precision.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
This statement can be derived by finding the lower bound of the sum of the spectral and temporal
Shannon entropy. This statement is proven by showing that the commutator of two Hermitian operators is
non-zero and then using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. One version says that the difference in energy and
time must be greater than Planck's constant. For 10 points, name this principle of quantum mechanics
where you can not simultaneously know the position and momentum of a particle.
ANSWER: Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
This statement applies whenever two operators have non-zero commutators. It says that the
product of certain pairs of quantities is greater than or equal to h-bar over two; occasionally, those
two quantities are energy and time. This statement's standard form states that it is (*) impossible to
measure both the position and momentum of a particle to infinite precision. For 10 points, name this
principle named for Werner Heisenberg.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
Einstein argued against this statement with the example of a particle passing through a slit, while its
formulator argued for its validity by imagining a microscope observing the collision between a
photon and an electron. One alternate formulation of this statement uses the variance in energy and
(*) time, instead of the normal quantities. It states that the product of a certain pair of quantities is greater
than or equal to h-bar over two. For 10 points, identify this quantum mechanical concept named for a
German physicist which states that one cannot simultaneously know both the position and momentum of a
particle to arbitrary precision.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
A criticism of this statement considers a box lined with mirrors, which opens to allow one photon to
escape, after which the box is weighed. The namesake of this statement described it with a thought
experiment involving a microscope observing an electron. Mathematically, this idea states that the
product of two conjugates must be greater than (*) h-bar over two. This statement applies to variables
such as energy and time, or position and momentum. For ten points, name this principle in the Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics, stating that two variables cannot be measured to exactness, named for
Werner Heisenberg.
ANSWER: Werner Heisenberg's uncertainty principle (accept Heisenberg's uncertainty principle before mention but do not accept or prompt after)
This statement realistically concerns variables that do not commute, as it defines one half the magnitude of
the commutator of variables to be the limit on the product of their variances. This principle can be stated as
the variance in energy times the variance in time is greater than or equal to h-bar over 2, though its typical
formulation concerns two other quantities, and the Bohr model of the atom violates this principle by
assigning definite positions to electrons. For 10 points, identify this principle named for a German physicist
which states that, at a given instance, the position and momentum of a particle cannot both be determined
precisely.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
Its formulation is derived using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and it was vigorously debated by Bohr and
Einstein, the latter of whom made use of slit and box thought experiments to attempt to disprove it. Its
founder originated it by picturing a free electron sitting beneath an extremely high-powered microscope that
uses gamma rays for illumination. Related to the observer effect and describing a certain quality of both
momentum and position, FTP, what is this principle of quantum mechanics named after the winner of the
1932 Nobel Prize in Physics, Werner Heisenberg?
ANSWER: Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle
When this statement's operators are related by Fourier transforms, it can be derived from the CauchySchwarz inequality. This statement was explained by its namesake in a thought experiment of a gamma-ray
microscope. The Bohr model violates this condition because it assigns a fixed angular momentum to each
quantized orbital. One form of this statement multiples energy and time, and this principle's most common
form sets the product of two standard deviations as greater than or equal to h-bar over two. For 10 points,
name this principle that states it is impossible to determine the position and momentum of a particle
simultaneously, named for a German physicist.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle [prompt on "uncertainty principle"; prompt on "principle of indeterminacy"]
This statement is used to describe the area of a state in phase space and the spreading of a wavepacket.
This statement is illustrated via a thought experiment using its namesake's microscope. This statement is
applied to operators whose commutator is nonzero. One side of this statement is a product of standard
deviations and the other is h-bar over 2. For 10 points, name this principle which states that it is impossible
to accurately measure a particle's position and momentum at the same time.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle [or uncertainty principle]
One derivation of this relation named for Robertson uses expectation values of Hermitian operators.
Mandelshtam and Tamm derived a corollary of this statement which multiplies the variance of time with the
variance of energy, a term which is greater than or equal to the reduced Planck constant over 2. According
to this law, electrons of known velocity passing through a slit would result in a probability distribution
rather than a single position as classical mechanics predicts. For 10 points, name this quantum principle
which asserts the impossibility of perfect measurement of both a particle's position and its momentum.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle [prompt on "Heisenberg"]
In its most general form, this statement is written as "standard deviation of A times standard deviation of B
is greater than or equal to negative i over two times the commutator of A and B." A thought experiment of
observing an electron through a gamma-ray microscope justifies this statement that can measure the lifetime
of a virtual particle. For 10 points, name this principle of quantum mechanics named for Heisenberg, that
explains why position and momentum of a particle cannot be measured simultaneously.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
The paper which introduced this experiment used the thought experiment of a gamma-ray microscope.
This statement arises when there is a non-zero commutator of any two observables, such as energy and time.
The term "h over 2 pi" appears on one side of the inequality involved with this statement, which is
fundamental to the Copenhagen interpretation. This principle states that a particle's position and momentum
cannot be both accurately measured. For 10 points, name this key principle of quantum mechanics named
for
a German physicist.
ANSWER: Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle [or Heisenberg Indeterminacy Principle; prompt on partial answer]
This statement was first developed in a thought experiment involving a microscope named for its
formulator, which dealt with the resolution of an electron struck by a photon. One formulation of
this statement considers the product of energy and time. It states that (*) delta x times delta p is greater
than or equal to "h" bar over 2. For 10 points, name this law of quantum mechanics that states that a
particle's position and momentum cannot both be measured to infinite accuracy.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
This law implies the existence of zero-point energy in the quantum harmonic oscillator, and the paper
that introduced it also introduced the idea of wavefunction collapse. This law can be derived by finding the
commutator of two non-commuting conjugate variables, like time and energy, and sets a lower bound of
h-bar over 2. For 10 points, name this law from quantum physics, which in one formulation states that it is
impossible to know the exact position and momentum of a particle at the same time.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
The canonical commutation relation between the variables involved in this relation implies that no state can
be an eigenstate of the variables at the same time. This relation is a special case of the RobertsonSchrodinger inequality, and it was introduced through a thought experiment that involved a gamma-ray
microscope. One way of representing this principle involves energy and time, and this principle states that
electrons can only have definite positions when they are in a state in which their energy is undefined. For 10
points, name this principle which states that the momentum and position of a particle cannot be precisely
measured simultaneously.
ANSWER: Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle
The creator of this principle explained it further with a thought experiment involving a gamma ray
microscope scattering rays at an electron. That experiment for this principle shows the trouble in a scientist
viewing the electron because of the influence of the scientist on the electron's path and momentum. For 10
points, name this principle developed by Werner Heisenberg that describes the impossibility of knowing
both an object's position and velocity at the same time.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle [or indeterminacy principle]
This statement does not hold if velocity at time zero is known and the time of interest is the past. It
is illustrated by a thought experiment involving a gamma-ray microscope, in which a photon and
electron collide. A corollary to this statement involves (*) energy and time, and one side of this
inequality is h bar over two. For 10 points, give this statement that there is a minimum product of the
inaccuracies of measuring a particle's momentum and position, which is named after a German physicist.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle [or Heisenberg uncertainty principle; or Heisenberg indeterminacy principle; or Heisenberg uncertainty relations]
One statement of it is applicable to the measurement of a quantum state of a particle, and has an
energy-time formulation. The Bohr model violates this statement since it assigns a definite radius to the
electron. The Cauchy-Schwartz inequality is used to derive this statement, which relates the standard
deviation of two conjugate variables to Planck's constant over 4 pi. For 10 points, identify this
statement which implies that one cannot simultaneously know both the position and velocity of a
particle, named for a German physicist.
ANSWER: Heisenberg Uncertainty principle
To counteract this statement, Einstein proposed weighing a box with a slit allowing light to escape, though
Bohr proved Einstein wrong by considering the gravity-induced time delay of the shutter. It explains why
only one component of the angular momentum of an electron may be known and is often proven using the
Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality. One formulation of it states that delta E times delta t must be greater than or
equal to h-bar over 2, and another set of observables share this minimum product. For 10 points, name this
principle, which states the inability to know an object's exact momentum and position simultaneously.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
A general form of this result is the Robertson-Schrodinger relation. Einstein unsuccessfully attempted to
refute it with his namesake "box" thought experiment. It applies in general to non-commuting quantum
observables, such as energy and time. Stated as an inequality, it relates the product of two standard
deviations to the quantity h-bar over 2. This statement derived from wave-particle duality forbids precise
knowledge of both a particle's position and momentum. For 10 points, name this quantum mechanical
principle formulated by Werner Heisenberg.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
It is the basis of a form of cryptography for which the BB84 and E91 key distribution schemes were
developed; these methods use this rule to detect eavesdropping. Einstein considered a box filled with
light, whose loss of energy would be associated with a loss of (*) weight, as means of refuting it. Its
proof often employs the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and it commonly states that h-bar over 2 must be less
than or equal to the product of the standard deviations of position and momentum. For 10 points, name this
principle that states that certain pairs of observables cannot exactly be determined to arbitrary precision.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle
This principle can be derived using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and Robertson-Schrodinger relation.
The namesake of this principle devised a thought experiment involving a gamma-ray microscope to
illustrate it. The term Planck's constant divided by four appears in an inequality associated with this
principle, which is valid for any pair of observables whose operators do not commute, such as energy and
time. The standard form of this principle states it is impossible to simultaneously measure both the position
and momentum of a particle with perfect accuracy. For 10 points, name this principle formulated by the
German physicist Werner Heisenberg.
ANSWER: Heisenberg uncertainty principle [or principle of indeterminacy]
The IBEX probe, using energetic neutral atom imaging, has challenged the traditional idea of the shape of
this space. The largest structure within it is the rippling current sheet, which can be modeled by the
Ballerina model, and is created by the changing magnetic field of the Sun. Within most of it, the solar wind
travels at supersonic speed and only slows to subsonic speeds, due to the balancing of the solar wind with
the pressure of the interstellar medium, at the termination shock. The Voyagers are both outside of the
termination shock, but are both still inside the bow shock, where this space ends. For ten points, what is this
"bubble" in space defined by the boundary between the solar wind and interstellar medium?
ANSWER: heliosphere
This element can express the fountain effect or creep up the walls of containers when cooled below the
lambda point. This element was first observed via the D3 Fraunhofer spectral line in the chromosphere of
the Sun. In stars, the proton-proton chain forms this element. The first known possible superfluid, this
substance has the opposite effect of sulfur hexafluoride when inhaled, and its nuclei are the same as
radioactive alpha particles. For 10 points, name this element, a noble gas with atomic number 2.
ANSWER: helium
The presence of this element's degenerate type leads to its namesake flash. This element with more than one
valence electron was produced during the nucleosynthesis after the Big Bang. The CNO cycle is used to
produce this element, which is consumed in red giants during the triple-alpha process. It was first
discovered as a (*) yellow spectral line during a solar eclipse in 1868. This element has a 25% abundance in
the universe, and its nucleus is equivalent to an alpha particle. Within most stars, it is created by the nuclear
fusion of hydrogen atoms, which it has double the protons of. For 10 points, name this element, the lightest
noble gas, with atomic symbol He.
ANSWER: helium (prompt on "He" before read)
This substance's spectrum displays the D3 Fraunhofer line. When this substance accretes to the surface of a
white dwarf or ceases to be degenerate in contracting stars, its namesake flash occurs. Hans Bethe
discovered its production by the CNO cycle, and three units of it combine in a namesake exergonic process
that occurs mainly in red giants. This first element to be detected extraterrestrially is the heaviest and last
product of the proton-proton chain, the fusion reaction in most stars. For 10 points, identify this secondmost abundant element in the universe, named for its abundance in our sun.
ANSWER: helium [nucleus or atom; prompt on "He"; accept alpha particles until "element" is read]
Electronic transitions in this element produce the Pickering series. Type Ib supernovae are the only
subclass of type I supernovae to possess absorption lines of this element. A phenomenon named for
this element occurs when a degenerate core composed of this element reaches a temperature of 100
million Kelvin. The portion of a star consisting of elements heavier than this element is larger for
population I stars than for population II stars. Stars move onto the horizontal branch after
experiencing a (*) "flash" named for this element. Red giants generate carbon from the fusion of three
atoms of this element. Nuclei of this element are formed in the proton-proton chain and by deuteriumtritium fusion--those nuclei are referred to as alpha particles. For 10 points, name this element formed from
the fusion of two hydrogen atoms, the lightest noble gas.
ANSWER: helium [prompt on "He"]
Like Boltzmann, this man names a type of neural network that learns the hidden structure of data by
learning to generate said data. He is the second namesake of a phenomenon which is described by the
Taylor-Goldstein equation and occurs when a high velocity shear occurs within a fluid. One theorem
named for this man states that a rapidly-decaying three dimensional vector field can be decomposed
into (*) irrotational and solenoidal components; that theorem is used to define the vector and scalar
potentials. One quantity named for him is equal to the sum of internal energy and the product of pressure
and volume. For 10 points, name this German scientist who gives his name to a type of free energy.
ANSWER: Hermann von Helmholtz
As the first Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, he advised Bell's work on the telephone. His
influence in acoustics and aeronautics is second to his in electromagnetism, where, independently of
Michael Faraday, he discovered self-inductance. For 10 points, name this American namesake of the SI
unit of inductance.
ANSWER: Joseph Henry
This scientist coined the term "asteroid" and was the first to propose that the Milky Way galaxy
was shaped like a disk. This man designed a new type of telescope, which had a 40 foot focal length,
which he used to discover two new moons of (+) Saturn. Although this astronomer was born in
Germany, most of his work took place in the city of Bath in England. Apart from being a composer
in his spare time, this man discovered the moons Oberon and Titania, which orbit his most famous
discovery, which he initially called (*) "George's Star". For ten points, name this astronomer who
discovered the seventh planet, Uranus.
ANSWER: William Herschel
This scientist was the first to note that Mars's polar caps have seasonal changes, leading this man to
propose that they are made of water. He was the first to realize that double stars actually contained two
gravitationally bound stars, leading to him coining the term binary star. This man also coined the word
asteroid. He discovered Enceladus and Mimas, as well as infrared radiation. This scientist discovered the
moon Oberon, as well as the object it orbits. For 10 points, name this discoverer of Uranus.
ANSWER: Sir Friedrich Wilhelm Herschel
Many of this man's discoveries were named by his son, John, one of which features a 1,500 km long
canyon called Messina Chasma. This scientist used a prism and thermometer to discover infrared
light, and coined the word "asteroid". He also discovered that multiple star systems were
gravitationally bound, which he called a (*) "binary star." He used a new type of reflecting telescope with
a 40-foot focal length and discovered the Mimas and Enceladus, the two moons of Saturn. Also known for
discovering Oberon and Titania, for ten points, name this German astronomer who discovered Uranus.
ANSWER: Sir Friedrich William Herschel
This person's son John checked his work and then extended it by making observations from South Africa.
This person separated the colors of sunlight and measured their temperatures, and his measurement of heat
found outside the visible colors was the discovery that the Sun produces infrared radiation. The European
Space Agency Space Observatory sensitive to infrared light is named after this person and his sister
Caroline. This person's work significantly extended the Messier Catalogue, and he discovered Titania and
Oberon. Name this builder of a telescope with one mirror
who discovered Uranus.
ANSWER: William Herschel
While studying the activities of lunar volcanoes one night, this man described them as greater in
intensity than the nucleus of comets. He concluded that the Solar System is moving in the direction of the
star Lambda Hercules, for which he coined the term "Solar Apex". He discovered the smallest known
spherical astronomical object, Mimas, as well as Enceladus, two moons of Saturn. However, he is more
famous for discovering Titania and Oberon, as well as the planet they orbit. For 10 points, name this
German-British astronomer who discovered Uranus.
ANSWER: Sir Frederick William Herschel
This man's sister never grew past four-foot three and assisted him in his work. The brother of Caroline,
this scientist worked as the organist at the Octagon Chapel at Bath. He noticed an object in 1781 which he
referred to as the "Georgian star" in honor of patron George III. This discoverer of Titania and Oberon
discovered a planet that has an axis of rotation tilted sideways. For 10 points, name this German-born
British astronomer who discovered Uranus.
ANSWER: Sir Frederick William Herschel
One of its namesakes would work with Hermann Vogt in developing a theorem that linked chemical
composition and mass. Important sections of it include the Henyey and Hayashi tracks as well as a portion
known as the Turnoff Point. It contains a portion known as the instability strip that contains RR Lyrae and
Cepheid variables. Its bottom axis contains a color index and its top axis contains classes from O to M
which cover a temperature range from 3,000 Kelvin to 30,000 Kelvin. It contains a central area known as
the main sequence that falls below super giants and above white dwarves. FTP, name this diagram used in
astronomy that compares stellar classification, color, luminosity and temperature.
ANSWER: Hertzsprung-Russell diagram
One theorem about these theories forbids a coloring scheme on the bases of Lp spaces of dimension 3
or higher in which exactly one projection operator is constrained to take on a value of 1. That
theorem, named for Kochen and Specker, states that noncontextual theories of this type cannot be
value-definite. In one beable-containing theory of this type, a system's time-evolution is described by
a guidance equation that relates well-defined particle trajectories to nabla of the phase of their
wavefunctions. That theory also incorporates the quantum equilibrium hypothesis, in which all
systems relax to a state in which the squared norm of the wavefunction equals the positiondistribution function, and is named for Bohm. Constraints on (*) correlations among the states of three
particles necessitate that any physically-realistic theory of this type be acausal. For 10 points, name these
theories which, when local, cannot reproduce quantum mechanics, according to Bell's theorem.
ANSWER: hidden variable theories [do not accept anything involving "quantum" at any time; do not accept "local hidden variable theory" or "nonlocal hidden variable theory"]
The inability to explain the extremely small but nonzero size of the field with this name is the
hierarchy problem. The mechanism with this name involves the absorbtion of Nambu-Goldstone
bosons and includes the process of spontaneous symmetry breaking. This mechanism explains why
the weak force has a short range, because the weak force carriers have mass. The particle with this
name was the 17th and final elementary particle found in the Standard Model. Give this name for a
boson that was confirmed to exist by recent experiments at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.
ANSWER: Higgs [accept more specific answers; accept gravity or gravitational until the 2nd sentence is completed]
It mediates the quantum field of the same name, which has a constant vacuum expectation value of
246 gigaelectronvolts. It is CP-even, but because it is a scalar particle, it has zero spin. Several
alternate models, such as top quark condensate theory, have been proposed in which it need not (*)
exist, as it is the only particle in the Standard Model that has yet to be observed. FTP, name this
hypothetical boson, sometimes called the "God particle", thought to be responsible for giving mass to the
gauge bosons.
ANSWER: Higgs boson (prompt on "God particle" before mentioned, do not accept "Higgs field")
This particle serves as a mediator in the quantum field with which it shares its name, whose
nonzero vacuum expectation value allows symmetry breaking. Its mass is estimated to be
approximately 140 times that of a proton, has spin zero, and explains the difference between the W
and Z bosons and the (*) massless photon, as it is thought to give mass to the gauge photons. The Large
Hadron Collider was designed to search for this particle, sometimes called the "God particle." For 10
points, name this particle, the only Standard Model particle yet to be observed.
ANSWER: Higgs boson
Stueckelberg action is a special case of the process named for this entity, and the non-zero vacuum
expectation value for this entity is essential to its namesake process. A complex spinor with four real
components represents this particle's field, and the collision of a fermion and an antifermion is thought to
form a virtual W or Z boson that can emit this particle. This particle emerged during the cooling of the
universe when spontaneous symmetry breaking occured, and the Large Hadron Collider at CERN detected
this particle in 2012. For 10 points, name this elementary particle responsible for mass.
ANSWER: Higgs Boson [accept Higgs Field before "particle" is mentioned]
This entity does not exist in a model known as Technicolor, and it was predicted in 1964 by its namesake,
along with Englert, Brout, Guralnik, Hagen, and Kibble. Possibly produced by the decay of two gluons, it
could also be made by combining the particles that mediate the weak force. Lacking intrinsic spin or electric
charge, it is believed to impart mass to other particles, and it is sometimes known as the God particle. For
10 points, name this eponymous boson that has yet to be observed.
ANSWER: Higgs boson
This object is not present in a series of models dubbed "Technicolor." One theory on how to produce one of
these objects is based on gluons decaying into a top quark and its antiparticle, then fusing. Another theory
on how they form involves the fusion of certain "W" and "Z" particles. The Standard Model predicts the
existence of this particle, while conformation of its existence will hopefully be supplied by experiments in
the Large Hadron Collider. For 10 points, name this "God Particle" that is a boson named for a scientist.
ANSWER: Higgs Boson
This particle is a leftover excitation and only manifestation of a field with the same name and is predicted to
very rarely be a product of high energy particle collisions. It was joked to have a mass of 125 billion
electron volts before its discovery due to two independent teams at CERN having correlating bumps in their
data. As of July 4, 2012, this is the last fundamental particle predicted by the Standard Model to be
discovered experimentally. For 10 points, name this boson responsible for providing mass and colloquially
referred to as the "God particle".
ANSWER: Higgs boson [prompt on "God particle" before read]
The violation of unitarity occurs for weak gauge bosons without the in models disregarding the
existence of these. Abbott-Farhi models seek an alternative to the existence of this (*) particle. Its two
isospin states are +1 and zero, and this is the only spin-0 particle in the Standard Model and remains the
only one yet to be observed. For 10 points, name this theoretical particle sought to be verified by the Large
Hadron Collider, a particle that would explain the existence of massive matter from massless elementary
particles.
ANSWER: Higgs bosons
This object's action was compared to a photon moving through a semiconductor by Yochiro Nambu.
This particle can be formed by the annihilation of a top-antitop quark pair. Technicolor theories
exclude the action of this particle. Spontaneous electroweak symmetry breaking leads to a non-zero
vacuum expectation value in this particle's mechanism. This particle is [*] thought to have a mass
around 140 GeV and spin 0. This particle explains why W and Z bosons have mass, but photons do not.
Sought by the Large Hadron Collider, for 10 points, name this so-called "God particle," an undiscovered
boson of the Standard Model thought to provide mass to other particles.
ANSWER: Higgs boson
This particle is produced along with a muon, and antimuon by the collision of an electron and a positron in
the Bjorken process. This particle's decay into two tau leptons has not yet been observed, casting doubt on
its postulated spin of zero. This elementary particle was initially hypothesized to explain, through
spontaneous symmetry breaking, why the W and Z bosons are massive, and we now know that its namesake
field is what imparts mass to matter. It is a target of the Large Hadron Collider. For 10 points, name this nolonger-hypothetical boson discovered in 2012, nicknamed the "God particle".
ANSWER: Higgs boson [prompt on "God particle" before mention]
Technicolor provides an alternative to this entity, and one model disregarding it considers particles typically
held as fundamental to be composite, the Abbot-Farhi model. Possessing isospin +1 and 0, this particle is
the only spin-0 particle in the Standard Model. Interactions with this particle can explain the key difference
between the strength of the electromagnetic and weak forces, though it remains the only undiscovered
Standard Model particle. For 10 points, identify this particle, whose interactions with matter would
hypothetically explain why some particles have mass.
ANSWER: Higgs boson [accept Higgs mechanism before "this particle"; prompt on Higgs]
This particle's namesake mechanism purports to explain how W and Z particls acquire mass through
spontaneous symmetry breaking. Its namesake field is thought to impart mass to the particles of the
Standard Model. Known as the "God particle," it is one of the particles being sought using the Large
Hadron Collider. For 10 points, name this type of boson that is the only particle in the Standard Model
which has yet to be observed.
ANSWER: Higgs boson
The only surviving writings of this man are his Commentary on the Phainomena (FYE-no-MEE-nuh) of
Eudoxus and Aratus. Ptolemy's Almagest is a source for much of what we know of this scientist, who may
have invented trigonometry. This ancient scientist used numerical data to measure the Earth's precession
and predict the orbits of the Sun and Moon. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek astronomer who
invented the system for classifying stars by magnitude.
ANSWER: Hipparchus of Nicaea
Stephen Benton invented the most popular type of this phenomenon, the rainbow. In general, these are
classified as either thin or thick, as amplitude or phase, and as transmission or reflection. Those
classifications depend on the location of the reference beam when these are created and the spacing of their
interference pattern. Dennis Gabor invented this technique whose creation was made practical by the
development of lasers. Name these images which appear to be three-dimensional.
ANSWER: hologram or holography
It's not Raman spectroscopy, but Ozaki, et al. developed a version of this technology using
surface plasmons which captured multiple wavelengths at once. Surface displacements can be
measured by using the "frozen fringe" form of this technique, which is a subtype of a form of
interferometry named for it. Media used in this technique include dichromatic gelatin, and a form
of digital microscopy based on this technique requires the use of a reconstruction algorithm
based on the angular spectrum method. Originally invented by Dennis Gabor, this technique
splits a laser beam into an object beam and a reference beam, which then cross on a recording
apparatus. For 10 points, name this technique which can be used to generate three-dimensional
images.
ANSWER: holography [or generating holograms]
The "thick" and "thin" types of these entities are classified by the extent to which the Bragg effect occurs in
them, and they can be prepared by bleaching the emulsion used to capture them with dichromated gelatin or
silver halide. Constructed by capturing interference fringes, the first of these entities were produced in
mercury vapor lamps by Dennis Gabor, but were later improved after the invention of helium-neon lasers.
Coming in transmission and reflection varieties, for 10 points, name these types of images, in which a threedimensional image is projected onto a two-dimensional surface, resembling those of Jessica Yellin
produced by CNN.
ANSWER: holograms
This person is the namesake of a version of helium also known as harmonium whose Schrodinger equation
can be solved. The square root of the constant associated with him is divided by two pi and the square root
of mass to find the frequency of a simple harmonic oscillator. In the equation named for him, the opposite
of that constant is multiplied by displacement to calculate force. Name this physicist who discovered the
law of elasticity and whose equation is used to find the restoring force of a spring.
ANSWER: Robert Hooke
This scientist assisted Robert Boyle to design an air pump to study the nature of the atmosphere. Like
Leibniz, this scientist fought with Isaac Newton; his feud concerned who discovered that gravity follows an
inverse-square law. Before building the first practical Gregorian telescope, he drew snowflake crystals and
the eyes of flies in his book Micrographia. This scientist named one of his most famous discoveries after
the rooms in which monks lived based on his observations of cork. Name this discoverer of biological cells
and a namesake law of elasticity which states that for certain materials, a restoring force is proportional in
magnitude to the displacement from equilibrium.
ANSWER: Robert Hooke
For orthotropic materials, a 36 member compliance matrix can be used to generalize this law. For an
isotropic solid this law can be expressed in terms of the two Lame parameters. The anisotropic form of this
law was expanded to describe three dimensional objects by Cauchy. The negative sign in this law describes
the tendency to return to equilibrium position, and this law does not apply beyond the elastic range. It states
that stress is directly proportional to strain. For 10 points, identify this law, more commonly stated as f
equals negative k x, which can be used to calculate the restoring force on a spring.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
Ronald Rivlin pioneered the study of materials not governed by this statement, and it was originally
published as an anagram of the phrase "Ut tensio, sic vis." This statement gives rise to a potential energy
function of one-half k x squared, and its basic form states that force is proportional and opposite to
displacement. For 10 points, name this law proposed by a Scottish physicist governing spring motion.
ANSWER: Hooke's law of elasticity
Voigt notation can express this law in a six-by six-matrix. Young's modulus gives tensile strain over a
range of limits for this law, which breaks down at the elastic limit. Objects that obey this law display
(*) simple harmonic motion. It uses a namesake constant with units of newtons per meter that describes
"stiffness". For 10 points, name this law written as "F equals negative k x", often used to model the
restoring force of a spring.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
One tensor associated with this statement is simplified by Voight notation to a six by six matrix, and
it was generalized to three dimensions by Cauchy. This statement can be applied to isotropic
materials with Poisson's ratio. The anisotropic form of this equation expressed results in the stiffness
tensor. Cross-sectional area over length times [*]Young's Modulus equals the force constant of this law,
which fails beyond the elastic limit of the yield strength. For 10 points, name this law stating that the
restoring force experienced by an object is directly proportional to the displacement, or that stress is
proportional to strain, often applied to springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's law of elasticity
This law can be extended using an 81 coefficient 4th order tensor named for Green. In another form, this law
can be written with Lame coefficients and Kronecker's delta. Augustin Cauchy would extend this law to
three dimensions using a compliance matrix. In isotropic form, it can be written generally using Poisson's
ratio, or alternatively using Young's modulus and the bulk modulus. One can use it to show the linear
relationship between the components of stress and strain, and for materials like steel it is only valid for its
elastic range. FTP, identify this law that gives the restoring force on a spring, typically written as F equals
the opposite of k times x.
ANSWER: Hooke's law
This equation is applicable when there exists negligible dislocation movement. Integrating this
equation with respect its dimensionless variable over the applicable range gives an energy density
known as the resilience. The inverse of the constant appearing in this equation is in general a rank-4
tensor known as the compliance, which is the inverse of the 21-component (*) stiffness, which is in turn
this equation's constant of proportionality. This law is approximately valid up to the proportional limit, but
exact only up to the elastic limit, above which plastic deformation occurs. Stating that, in an isotropic
material, the elastic modulus times the strain is equal to the stress, FTP, identify this law of physics named
for its British formulator, often used to model the behavior of springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's law [prompt on law of elasticity]
It can be thermodynamically demonstrated by assuming that the processes which this law characterizes are
adiabatic. In another formulation, it yields the necessary potential energy to perform that process on a
material over any distance. For forces below a material's yield strength, it provides approximations of linear
deformations and Young's modulus divides the two variables present in it. FTP, "stress is proportional to
strain" is the common formulation of what law by an English scientist that models the motion of springs?
ANSWER: Hooke's law
For anisotropic substances, one component of this statement can be simplified into a 6 by 6 matrix
using Voigt notation. A compliance matrix was used to generalize the anisotropic form of this
statement to three dimensional bodies by Cauchy, and the negative sign appearing in this law implies
a direction back towards the (*) equilibrium position. It breaks down beyond the elastic range, and
integrating it can be used to show that the work done by a certain system is equal to the product of one-half
k and x squared. Stated as F equals negative k x, this is, for 10 points, which law that governs the restoring
force of a spring?
ANSWER: Hooke's law
A three dimensional generalization of this law was formulated by Cauchy and makes use of the compliance
matrix. A constant used in this law is equal to "Young's Modulus times cross-sectional area over length."
This law only holds for a material's elastic range, where stress is linearly related to strain. This law gives a
restoring force equal to the displacement from equilibrium times a material-dependent constant, symbolized
"k." For 10 points, name this law often used to model springs, which is named for an English scientist.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
A three-dimensional version of it is written in terms of the first and second Lame parameters.
Hyperelastic materials notably do not obey this law, and it fails beyond the yield point. The constant in this
law can be divided by the mass in order to find the square of the oscillation period, and integrating both
sides of this law gives the potential energy stored in the system described. For 10 points, name this law that
states F equals negative k x, which gives the restoring force of a spring.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
Lucien LaCoste used this law as the theoretical basis for developing a seismograph that uses certain
objects with "zero length." Conservative materials eliminate 15 of the 36 possible values in the C-matrix
of Cauchy's generalization of this law to three-dimensional bodies. It involves two quantities related by
the first Lame (lahm) constant, also known as the shear modulus. For 10 points, name this law stating
that the restoring force F equals negative k x, that relates stress and strain in materials like springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
In three dimensional objects, this law is expressed using the Lame (Luh-MAY) parameters, and it
notably does not apply past the yield point. Materials obey this law if they have a constant Young's
modulus and dislay linear elasticity. It demonstrates that strain is directly proportional to stress. For 10
points, name this law which states that force is equal to negative displacement times a physicsal constant,
often used to model the behavior of springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
One form of this law can be written using Lame coefficients and Kronecker's delta, and its anisotropic form
can be expressed using Voigt notation. Cross-sectional area times Young's modulus divided by length is
equal to the force constant of this law that was generalized by Cauchy to three dimensions. The tendency to
return to an equilibrium position is the reason for the negative sign in this law that shows stress is directly
proportional to strain. Typically written as F equals negative k times x, for 10 points, identify this law used
to calculate the restoring force on a spring.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
Dovstam added frequency dependent complex terms to this statement to account for material damping.
Cauchy generalized this statement to an arbitrary body and constructed two six-dimensional vectors related
either by the compliance matrix or its inverse, the stiffness matrix. This law approximates the relationship
between stress and strain, and the point at which this law fails to hold approximates the Elastic Limit. FTP,
name this relationship usually formulated for the force applied to, and resultant deformation of, massless
springs, mathematically given as F equals negative k x.
ANSWER: Hooke's law
Cauchy generalized this statement to higher dimensions and related the two quantities involved to each
other via the compliance matrix and the stiffness matrix. The ratio of the two quantities involved is also
known as mu, or Lame's second parameter. It can be derived in 3 dimensions using Poisson's ratio and the
Young modulus. Sensitive to temperature and loading rate, rubber is a notable exception to this law. Stated
as F equals negative kx, it states that stress is directly proportional to strain. Containing the spring constant,
for 10 points, name this law of elasticity named after a British physicist.
ANSWER: Hooke's law (or equation) of elasticity
Extensions of this relation to 3 dimensions involve a fourth-order tensor with 81 coefficients symbolized
sigma for stiffness, or Cauchy's 36-entry compliance matrix. Inapplicable to rubber, this relation applies
below the yield strength to linear-elastic materials for which Young's modulus is defined. Usable for a
parallel or series system of harmonic oscillators, as well as individuals, for 10 points, name this law stating
that the restoring force is proportional to displacement, by the formula F equals negative k x, in springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
An "augmented" version of it implements a constant valued constitutive matrix and accounts for frequency
dependent damping. When it is generalized to three dimensions, its formulation contains Green's tensor,
and it is more generally stated as the tensile stress is directly proportional to strain. For 10 points, identify
this law which states that the force exerted by a spring is in the opposite direction of and proportional to the
distance compressed.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
Arruda-Boyce, Ogden, and Mooney-Rivlin models are all alternatives to this law, and another
alternative assumes that that the work done on a solid is equal to the rate of change of Helmholtz free
energy via a relation involving Cauchy stress and the stretch rate tensor. This law gives Young's modulus
as the ratio of stress to strain. For 10 points, name this law the governs the motion of springs and is
typically written as F equals negative k x.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
Similar objects that obey a more complex potential than those that obey this law can be modeled via
the Duffing equation, while another class of materials that don-t obey this law can be modeled using
the Left Cauchy-Green tensor. Another material that doesn-t obey it is described using invariants of
a Finger Tensor and are named for Mooney and Rivlin. A three-dimensional version of this law requires
the use of the 4th-order stiffness tensor. It can be expressed as sigma equals E times epsilon, but is more
commonly expressed in terms of restoring force. For 10 points, name this law that states F equals k x, used
to describe springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
The Mooney-Rivlin solid model is a generalized extension of this principle, which was first published
as an anagram that rearranged to form the Latin phrase "ut tensio, sic vis." Cauchy later extended it
to three-dimensional bodies, and one generalization of this principle makes use of the bulk and shear
moduli, while another relates (*) stress and strain via Young's modulus. Holding true in linear-elastic
materials until the yield point is reached, this law is most commonly seen in the spring equation form. For
10 points, identify this law relating force to displacement and expressed as F = -kx (f equals negative k x).
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
Although this rule is parameterized by 81 constants, the minor symmetries enable this relation to be
expressed in a 6 by 6 matrix using Voigt notation. Two constants named after Lame are found in this rule's
expression in 3-dimensional materials. More simply, this law is stated in an equation containing Poisson's
ratio and Young's modulus. This rule fails in materials like rubber, and in other materials, elastic
deformation causes this law to only be valid below the yield strength. This law can also be used to calculate
the frequency of a system, and one form of it is stated as "stress is proportional to strain". For ten points,
name this law stating that F equals negative k times x, which governs springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
This law can be written in the Voigt notation as a six by six compliance matrix. One form of this law is the
expression for the free energy of a deformed isotropic body, and includes the Lame coefficients. A
generalization of it includes Young's modulus, and simple harmonic motion occurs when it is obeyed. This
law includes a negative sign because the force exerted is always directed opposite to the displacement of the
object. FTP name this law that governs springs and is stated as F equals negative k times x.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
This statement's anisotropic form can be expressed using Voigt notation with 6 by 6 compliance and
stiffness matrices. It can also be stated using Poisson's ratio and Young's modulus. This equation only
applies up to the yield strength for linearly elastic materials and gives a linear relationship between stress
and strain. It contains the spring constant k as the constant of proportionality between force and
displacement. Stated as "F equals negative kx," for 10 points, name this law of elasticity that describes the
restorative force of a stretched spring.
ANSWER: Hooke's law
One expression of this law includes lambda and mu, the Lame parameters. The compliance tensor appears
in its 3-dimensional generalization, formulated by Cauchy. The constant parameter appearing in this law can
be approximated using the bulk modulus and Young's modulus. The integral of this equation with respect to
displacement gives an expression for elastic potential energy, and it is only applicable up to the elastic limit.
It states that the restoring force is proportional to the displacement, or "F equals negative k x." For 10
points, name this law describing the behavior of springs.
ANSWER: Hooke's law
For anisotropic substances, this law can be represented using Voigt notation; it can be derived by
defining deformation as adiabatic. Cauchy adapted this law to three-dimensional bodies; in three
dimensions, a 4th order tensor with 81 coefficients must be applied for this law to hold; it is called the
[*] stiffness tensor. This law holds only in the elastic range, below the yield strength, and Young's modulus
is the ratio of stress and strain over that range. For 10 points, identify this law often applied to springs,
defined by setting the restoring force equal to the negative of the spring constant k times displacement.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
In three-dimensional systems, one value in this law is replaced by a tensor with 81 coefficients. The
square root of the proportionality constant in this law divided by the mass gives the natural frequency of the
system it describes. This law only holds below the yield point, and integrating it gives an expression for
potential energy, which is minimal at zero displacement. For 10 points, name this law, which relates the
displacement of a spring to the force applied.
ANSWER: Hooke's law
Julian Smallwood noted a hysteresis-like departure from this law, which Voigt modified by adding
higher order terms. The yield point represents the point at which this law no longer applies, and
integration of this equation gives the dependence of potential energy on displacement. Young's
modulus is the coefficient in this first-order approximation of the relationship between stress and strain.
For 10 points, name this law usually written as F equals negative k x, which governs the motion of a
mass on a spring.
ANSWER: Hooke's Law
Mixmaster universe theory was proposed by Misner to explain the problem of this name by
suggesting that the universe had a chaotic epooch. The cosmic censorship hypothesis holds that all
solutions of Einstein Field equations lie beyond a region of this name. The altitude, the azimuth and
the zenith distance are the three coordinates in a system which assumes that this region on Earth is
the fundamental plane. The (*) problem of this name concerns how regions of the universe could appear
so similar despite the distance between them and was solved by inflationary theory. One region of this
name is a boundary from which light cannot escape. For 10 points, the point of no return for a black hole is
the colloquial term for the "event" type of what region?
ANSWER: horizon [accept horizon problem or event horizon at any point]
It's not the scaling parameter or the speed of light, but one parameter named for this man is squared in a
non-relativistic version of Friedmann's equation. One system he helped create was modified by Gerard du
Vaucouleurs to account for rings and lenses. That system classifies galaxies based on bars and spiral arms,
and is known as his namesake tuning fork diagram. The constant of proportionality between distance and
recessional velocity is termed his namesake constant. He is notable for proving the expansion of the
Universe. Name this man who is the namesake of an optical space telescope.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
His observations of Cepheid variables in what was then called the Andromeda Nebula demonstrated
that that object was too distant to lie within the Milky Way; in addition to suggesting that other
galaxies must exist, he introduced a method to classify them featuring a diagram often displayed like
a (*) tuning fork. His most prominent contribution arose out of work with Milton Humason, though the
constant of proportionality was originally over seven times higher than its present value. For 10 points,
name this astronomer who in his namesake law gives recession velocity as about seventy kilometers per
second per megaparsec times distance.
ANSWER: Edwin Powell Hubble
Variance in one law named for this man is caused by cosmic velocity dispersion. That law states
that the recessional velocity of a galaxy is equal to the galaxy's distance times 45 to 90 kilometers per
second per megaparsec. That value, whose reciprocal is the age of the universe, is this man's
namesake constant. In 2013, an object honoring (*) NASA administrator James Webb will replace an
item named for this man, which takes panoramic "deep field" images of distant galaxies. For 10 points,
identify this astronomer, the namesake of an active space telescope.
ANSWER: Edwin Powell Hubble
One object named for this man was fixed in 1993 with the COSTAR instrument. That object named for this
man will be succeeded by one named for James Webb in approximately five years. This man discovered a
Cepheid variable in the Andromeda Nebula in the early 1920s and is also the namesake of a tuning-fork
diagram used to classify galaxies. His namesake law, which includes a constant that is approximately
seventy kilometers per second per megaparsec, gives the relationship between redshift and distance. That
law named for this man shows that the universe is expanding. For 10 points, name this astronomer who also
names a space telescope.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
This man incorrectly found Andromeda to be approximately one million light-years away. Later work led
him to declare a redshift law named after him, though it was first proposed by Georges Lemaitre. His
"tuning fork" classifies galaxies based on appearance. The reciprocal of his namesake constant is the
approximate age of the universe; that constant is commonly given in units of kilometers per second per
megaparsec. For 10 points, name this American astronomer who postulated the expansion of the universe,
the namesake of an orbiting telescope.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
Astronomers have recently debated whether or not our region of the universe is in a type of bubble named
after this scientist. This astronomer is the namesake of a region of space in Fornax and another in Ursa
Major that are blocked by few Milky Way stars and are thus good locations to observe early galaxies. This
person is the namesake of speed divided by proper distance, which is typically measured in kilometers per
second per megaparsec to give a value of approximately seventy for his namesake constant. Name this
person whose namesake telescope has been orbiting Earth since 1990.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
The deceleration parameter is proportional to the time derivative of a parameter named for this man. That
parameter named for this scientist is defined as the time derivative of the scale factor divided by the scale
factor. Certain entities which are lens-shaped or lenticular, appear at the center of a construct named for this
scientist. A law named for this scientist states that the speed at which certain entities recede from the Earth
is equal to their distance from the Earth times a constant named for him. That constant is equal to the
reciprocal of the age of the universe. Elliptical and spiral galaxies can be found on his namesake tuning fork
diagram. For 10 points, name this American astronomer who lends his name to a telescope that in 1990 was
launched into space.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
The findings of this person resolved the Shapley-Curtis debate, and he discovered the asteroid now known
as 1373 Cincinnati. This person's name is associated with NGC 2261, a variable nebula he observed when
he became the first person to look through the Hale Telescope. His tuning-fork diagram separates spiral
from barred spiral galaxies, and he showed that Andromeda was not a nebula, but a separate galaxy outside
the Milky Way. An approximate age of the universe is given by the inverse of this man's namesake
constant, which also appears in his law stating that the velocity of objects receding from the Earth is
proportional to their distance; a fact he established by observing the redshift of galaxies. Famous for
proving that the universe is expanding, name this man whose model of the cosmos continues to be
supported by the observations of the space telescope named for him.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
One quantity named for this man is squared, then multiplied by three, then divided by quantity 8pi times
big G to obtain the critical density. In the Friedmann equation, one quantity named for this man is raised to
the first power. One over a constant named for this man is roughly equal to the age of the universe, which is
known as this man's "time." This man placed Seyfret galaxies at the center of his namesake "tuning fork."
This man used Cepheid variables to show that Andromeda was another galaxy. One constant named for this
man is equal to 71 kilometers per second per megaparsec. For 10 points, name this astronomer whose
namesake law is used to find the distance to astronomical objects.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
Albert Einstein denounced the cosmological constant after reading of this man's research. This scientist
discovered that all deep space objects not only had a red shift relative to the Earth, but also to each other, a
result that suggested an expanding universe. The proportionality between the speed of recession and the
distance from the Earth defines this scientist's namesake constant. He also developed a diagram to classify
galaxies, called his namesake tuning fork. For 10 points, name this astronomer whose name adorns a space
telescope.
ANSWER: Edwin [Powell] Hubble
One classification system developed by this man distinguishes objects labeled Sa through Sc from those
labeled SBa through SBc. This man resolved the Curtis-Shapley debate by using Cepheid variables to
measure the distance to the Andromeda Galaxy. This namesake of a tuning fork diagram for classifying
galaxies also names a constant currently estimated at about 70 kilometers per second per megaparsec. That
constant is used in a law named for this man, which sets relative velocity proportional to distance and
describes the universe's constant expansion. For 10 points, identify this namesake of a space telescope
launched by NASA in 1990, an American astronomer.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
This astronomer resolved the Shapley-Curtis debate by using standard candles to calculate the distance
of the Andromeda Galaxy. This astronomer formulated a law stating that the redshift-calculated recessional
velocity of a galaxy is proportional to its distance from Earth. For 10 points, name this American
astronomer, the namesake of a space telescope launched in 1990.
ANSWER: Edwin Powell Hubble
Together with Sandage, this person names the most massive and luminous variable stars in the M31 galaxy,
and he used Cepheid variables to show the Andromeda spiral nebula was actually a galaxy far beyond the
Milky Way. He introduced a classification scheme for galaxies based on shape, known as his namesake
tuning fork diagram. The inverse of his namesake constant is an estimate of the age of the universe, and he
worked together with one-time janitor Milton Humason to formulate his namesake law, which states the
redshifts of remote galaxies are proportional to their distances from Earth. For 10 points, name this
American astronomer, the namesake of a notable Space Telescope.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
The most basic law named for this person was developed by Alexander Friedmann and
Georges Lemaitre [zhorzh luh-my-truh] before him. A theory claiming that the region of the universe
near us has an unusual mass density is his namesake "bubble". A sequence named for this person,
called a tuning-fork diagram, shows lenticular galaxies at its center, with arms for elliptical and spiral
galaxies. This person discovered that many Cepheid [SEH-fee-ud] variable stars are outside the Milky
Way, and the constant named for him gives the ratio of velocity to distance for distant objects. Name
this astronomer who discovered that the universe is expanding, and who is the namesake of a space
telescope.
ANSWER: Edwin Hubble
In a matter-dominated universe, the square of this value is inversely proportional to the cosmological
constant, and during cosmic inflation the scale factor was proportional to e to the power of this value
multiplied by time. Taking the time derivative of this value and dividing by this value squared,
adding one, and negating gives the deceleration parameter, while the square of this value appears one
one side of the Friedman equation. Easily defined as the time derivative of the scale factor divided by the
scale factor, one over this value is approximately equal to the age of the universe. For 10 points, name this
proportionality parameter between an object's distance and its redshift, named for an American astronomer.
ANSWER: Hubble's constant
The square of this quantity equals eight-thirds pi times the gravitational constant times the critical density,
and the Friedmann equation relates the square of this quantity to the density, curvature and cosmological
constant. The namesake of this physical quantity also names a sequence typically illustrated using a tuningfork classification diagram centered on lenticular galaxies. This quantity appears in a law describing a
namesake flow that refers to the non-peculiar motions of galaxies, and it is proportional to one over the age
of the Universe. Its value was calculated by its namesake using the Cepheid period-luminosity relationship
to obtain distances, which were then paired with redshift measurements. For 10 points, name this quantity
relating galaxy distances and recession velocities due to cosmic expansion.
ANSWER: Hubble parameter or constant
Assuming the validity of the lambda-CDM model, in which dark matter is exclusively slow and non-
baryonic, this quantity is calculable from observing the associated microwave shifts in the SunyaevZeldovich effect. The square of its time-dependent form is related to the time derivative of the scale factor
over the scale factor in one of the Friedmann solutions to Einstein's field equations. The current value for
this constant was obtained from the WMAP mission's study of the cosmic microwave background. For 10
points, identify this quantity estimated at 71 kilometers per second per megaparsec, whose reciprocal
approximates the age of the universe.
ANSWER: Hubble constant or parameter
The square of this quantity equals eight-thirds pi times the gravitational constant times the critical density,
and the Friedmann equation relates the square of this quantity to the density, curvature and cosmological
constant. The namesake of this physical quantity also names a sequence typically illustrated using a tuning-
fork classification diagram centered on lenticular galaxies. This quantity appears in a law describing a
namesake flow that refers to the non-peculiar motions of galaxies, and it is proportional to one over the age
of the Universe. Its value was calculated by its namesake using the Cepheid period-luminosity relationship
to obtain distances, which were then paired with redshift measurements. For 10 points, name this quantity
relating galaxy distances and recession velocities due to cosmic expansion.
ANSWER: Hubble parameter or constant
The COSTAR instrument was added to this device. Perkin-Elmer was contracted to build a component
of it, and this object was discovered to have been assembled using a defective null corrector. A device
named for James Webb is set to succeed it, and data collected by it includes its namesake Deep Field,
Ultra-Deep Field, and Extreme Deep Field. This instrument was used to make accurate measurements of
Cephid variables in the Virgo cluster. For ten points, name this gigantic space-borne telescope named for an
American astronomer.
ANSWER: Hubble Space Telescope
In 1993, COSTAR was added to this object to correct a spherical aberration. This object is named for a
scientist who discovered that galaxies accelerate away from each other. It will be replaced in 2018 by a
similar object named for James Webb. This object is controlled from Greenbelt, Maryland, and it
discovered the so-called "Pillars of Creation" in the Eagle Nebula. For ten points, identify this unmanned
space observatory responsible for many high-resolution astronomical photographs.
ANSWER: Hubble Space Telescope
An incorrectly configured null corrector used to build part of this device necessitated the installation
of COSTAR to properly focus a mirror in it. This instrument originally possessed the High Speed
Photometer and the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph, and a similar object named for (*)
James Webb is scheduled to replace this in a few years. It took several images of the Deep Field and Ultra
Deep Field that showed the shape and formation of early galaxies after the Big Bang. For 10 points, identify
this optical NASA space telescope launched in 1990 and named after an American astronomer.
ANSWER: Hubble Space Telescope (or HST)
The Lundmark law is a quadratic form of this law, which was found to better fit empirical observations by I.
E. Segal, and the Tully-Fisher relation can be used to estimate on of the quantities in its mathematical
expression. Friedmann's equations can yield the constant of proportionality in this law, while recent recent
observations of Cepheid variables estimate that constant to be between 65 and 80 kilometers per second-
megaparsec. For 10 points, identify this law developed by a namesake American astronomer, which states
that the redshift of light coming from any source is proportional to the distance of the source.
ANSWER: Hubble's Law (prompt on H-naught)
The linearity of this equation is a theoretical proof of homogeneity and isotropy of the universe and
measurements suggest we are close to the critical density at which it would asymptotically approach
zero. The peculiar velocity derived from this equation suggests the existence of the Virgo
supercluster, Its namesake parameter can be measured using (*) Cepheid variables and is
approximately seventy kilometers per second per megaparsec. For 10 points, name this law named after an
astronomer which gives the speed at which distant galaxies are travelling away from us.
ANSWER: Hubble's Law
This relation, which was formulated by analyzing the spectra of galaxies, is currently believed to be caused
by dark energy and is a variation of Doppler shift in the context of special relativity. Fainter, older galaxies
were noted to have their spectrum shifted further to lower wavelengths, a result which supported the
predictions of the Friedmann equations and indicated that other galaxies were moving away from our
galaxy. A more interesting observation showed that not only were galaxies in all regions of the sky moving
away from the Milky Way, but they were also moving away from each other. FTP, what is this law which
explains the expansion of the universe which gets its name from its famous astronomer formulator and a
namesake constant and space telescope?
ANSWER: Hubble's Law
Peculiar motion refers to trajectories that cannot be explained entirely by this relation, and that can
lead to effects like the Fingers of God. A parameter of this law is equal to a prime over a, where a is
the scale factor in the Friedmann equations, and that parameter was calculated by the Planck
spacecraft to be about (*) seventy kilometers per second per megaparsec. This law states that velocity is
proportional to its namesake constant times distance from earth. For 10 points, name this law that states that
things in the universe are all moving away from each other.
ANSWER: Hubble's Law
The constant in this law can be derived by taking the time derivative of the scale factor divided by
the scale factor according to the Friedman equation. The constant in this law is equal to one over the
age of the universe, and this law is used alongside velocities calculated from redshift. It states that the
(*) distance to an astronomical body is proportional to the velocity that it is moving away from the
observer. For 10 points, name this law whose formulator also names a space telescope.
ANSWER: Hubble's law
One deviation from this law is a result of "pancaking" via the Kaiser Effect, while application of the virial
theorem explains another deviation known as the Fingers of God. In some cases, the quadratic Lundmark's
Law fits better than this relation, and it can be derived from the Friedman-Robertson-Walker equations. The
change in one quantity in this law is dependent on the sign of the deceleration parameter q, and measuring
anisotropies in the CMB all give a value around 70 for this law's namesake parameter. FTP, name this law
which states that the redshift of an astronomical object is proportional to its distance from the observer,
named for an American cosmologist and namesake of a giant space telescope.
ANSWER: Hubble's Law
One value found in this equation can be used to find the deceleration parameter and is squared on one
side of the Friedmann equations. The constant found in this equation is equal to one over the age of the
universe, or 74 kilometers per second per megaparsec. This law states that the Doppler shift of distant
objects in space is proportional to their distance away from the observer. For 10 points, name this
astronomical law, whose discoverer is also honored by a space telescope.
ANSWER: Hubble's law
In its most general form, it states that a far-field diffraction pattern is the spatial Fourier transform of the
aperture shape. In a single slit diffraction, it states that each point in the opening through which the wave
passes acts as a point source of waves, which interfere with one another to produce a pattern. FTP, name
this principle of wave propagation named for a Dutch physicist, which regards an advancing wave as the
sum of many fresh disturbances, and states that any obstruction produces a secondary wavefront.
ANSWER: Huygens- Principle
Hadamard introduced the "narrow sense" of this principle, and Kirchoff used an obliquity factor to
eliminate its retrogressive implications. It only holds for an odd number of spatial dimensions, as this allows
for higher order terms to vanish in the polar wave equation. It was modified to include superposition, which
allowed it to explain diffraction, by Fresnel, and its namesake showed how it explained Snell's Law. For 10
points, name this principle that says every point on a propagating wavefront produces secondary wavelets
which comprise the envelope of the wave, named for the Dutch physicist whose eponymous probe split
from the Cassini to land on Titan in 2004.
ANSWER: Huygens' Principle [accept Huygens-Fresnel Principle]
The anti variety of this element can be produced by shooting antiprotons at clusters of xenon atoms.
It can also be produced through the serpentinization process, and was the gas used in the (*)
Hindenburg. Isotopes of this element include protium, tritium, and deuterium. 75 percent of the universe is
made of, for ten points, which diatomic element that only has one proton and electron, the first element on
the periodic table?
ANSWER: Hydrogen
The emission line of one form of this element, first detected by Harold Ewen and Edward Purcell
using a horn antenna, is sometimes called the hyperfine line and occurs at 21 centimeters. The
reionization of the universe typically refers to the reionization of this element. When the supply of
this element is depleted in a main sequence star, it (*) expands to a red giant. The CNO cycle is one
fusion reaction in which stars convert this element to helium. For 10 points, name this most abundant
element in the universe.
ANSWER: hydrogen
The Lyman and Balmer series correspond to spectral emissions involving the ground state and
first excited state of this element. This element is transformed in the CNO cycle that powers large
stars and in the proton proton chain in smaller stars. Schrodinger developed his atomic theory after
the Bohr model failed to explain elements more (*) complicated than this one. Tritium and deuterium
are isotopes of this element. For 10 points, name this most abundant element in the universe with symbol
H.
ANSWER: hydrogen
The 21-centimeter line is cased by hyperfine transitions of this element. Two atoms of this element are
involved in a chain reaction releasing neutrinos and gamma rays, and the Teller-Ulam design was for a
device using this element. Its antimatter counterpart was created and confined at CERN in November 2010,
and the visible spectral line emissions of this element give rise to the Balmer series. The Bohr model was
originally conceived to describe an atom of this element, which is converted into helium in stars. For 10
points, name this lightest element with an atomic number of 1.
ANSWER: hydrogen
In 2009, the Hubble Space Telescope was refitted with batteries composed of nickel and this other
element. This element was the namesake of a device pioneered in the USSR by Andrei Sakharov and in the
US by Teller and Ulam. Produced for centuries by adding active metals to acids, in the eighteenth century,
it was known as phlogiston. This element is often blamed for the devastation of the Hindenburg. For the
point, name this highly flammable, lightest element.
ANSWER: Hydrogen [prompt on H]
Pauli calculated the energies of this system with the Runge-Lenz vector. This system's polarizability
is derived using first order perturbation of the eigenfunctions and is proportional to the third power
of the characteristic length scale. The position of one of the components of this system is smeared out
due to self-interaction in an effect that causes 2p and 2s states to have different energies. This exactly
(*) solvable system has wavefunctions that are a product of generalized Laguerre polynomials and the
spherical harmonics.. The Lamb shift was found in this system whose excited states have energies that fall
off like n squared and its ground state energy is 13.6eV. This system has a Coulomb potential and the Bohr
model assumes the negatively charged particle in this system travels in a circular orbit. For 10 points, name
this quantum mechanical system that has a single proton orbited by a single electron.
ANSWER: hydrogen atom [accept hydrogen-like atom; prompt on H]
In this system, the energies can be corrected by examining the effects of spin-orbit coupling and Thomas
precession, which are components of the fine structure correction. Perturbation theory can be used to
describe the Stark and Zeeman effects in this system. The energy levels of this system are equal to negative
13.6 electron-volts divided by the square of the principal quantum number. The wavelengths of spectral
lines produced in this system are given by the Rydberg formula, and an important length scale in it is the
Bohr radius. For 10 points, name this system consisting of one electron and one proton, an atom of the
lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen atom [accept hydrogenic atom or hydrogen-like atom or really any atom until "13.6"]
The radial part of the state vector for this system is given by a Laguerre polynomial while the
angular portion is given by the spherical harmonics. Hyperfine splitting in it results in the 21-cm line,
and solving this system requires separating the radial, angular, and azimuthal parts of the
Schrodinger Equation. It produces series of lines such as the Paschen, Balmer, and Lyman series, whose
energy is proportional to the difference of one over n-squared as given by the Rydberg formula. For 10
points, name this quantum mechanical system which is accurately described by the Bohr Model and consists
of one proton and one neutron.
ANSWER: the hydrogen atom
The Darwin term in this system's Hamiltonian corrects its energy from the effect of
zitterbewegung. Lamb and Retherford demonstrated a roughly 1 gigahertz energy difference in
supposedly degenerate solutions to this system. This system's wavefunction consists of a
spherical harmonic multiplied by a Laguerre polynomial. The fine structure constant was first
identified from the splitting in this system's spectral lines. An empirical equation modelling this
system noted that its emission spectrum was quantized by the reciprocal of perfect squares. The
Balmer series arises from this system according to the Rydberg equation, which models only it.
This two-body system can be solved exactly by the Schrodinger equation. For 10 points, name
this system containing a proton and an electron.
ANSWER: hydrogen atom [or hydrogen-like atoms]
An operator that induces this phenomenon must be deterministic and rate-independent. The Preisach model
conceptualizes this phenomenon as a collection of weighted nonideal relays connected in parallel. A
transducer will exhibit this phenomenon if it has nontrivial internal states. A comparator can be made
resistant to noise by augmenting it with this nonlinear property, converting it into a Schmitt trigger. This
phenomenon exists in any system where outputs are not a pure function of inputs, as seen on a graph of
magnetization versus applied magnetic field in a ferromagnet when an alternating field is applied. For 10
points, identify this strongly nonlinear phenomenon found in many magnetic systems, in which the system's
state depends on its history.
ANSWER: hysteresis
It can be studied at zero temperature on a Bethe lattice, and theoretical approaches to it involve
calculations based on the Preisach model. It can be represented via the Landau-Lifshitz equation, and the
thermodynamic type is intrinsic in superelastic deformation. It is characteristic of first-order phase
transitions, and supercooling generates a thermal curve of this type. Demonstrated in a random-field Ising
model, in this phemonenon, ,motion in domain walls generates Barkhausen noise, which is represented as
small jumps in loops of this type, and the energy loss due to reversing the magnetization is proportional to
the area of loop. For 10 points, what is this phenomenon where the magnetization of a ferromagnetic
material remains after the external magnetic field is removed?
ANSWER: hysteresis loop
One example of this phenomenon is chiral autocatalysis from apparently racemic solutions, while in another
context, this term applies to asynchronous protein cascades involved in coagulation. This concept was
defined by Krasnoselski using the theory nonlinear dynamics and nonlinear operators, and the energy lost
through this phenomenon is given by the Steinmetz equation. A model of this phenomenon based on
monocrystals was devised by Weiss, while a model of it whose building blocks are relay nonlinearities is
named after Preisach. A form of this phenomenon results in an example of self-organized criticality known
as the Barkhausen effect, and the characteristic loop produced by this phenomenon appears on the graph of
magnetization versus magnetic field strength. For ten points, identify this phenomenon in which a material
exhibits a "memory," or a time-lagging dependence on applied stress.
ANSWER: hysteresis
The Duhem-Madelung model for it does not give a unique response for a given input and the Preisach
model is considered the best. This property's namesake coefficient is found in Steinmetz's equation that
measures loss of energy. If its namesake effect is small, the remnant field is nearly zero and Barkhausen
pattern reproducibility depends on the size of its namesake loop, which is found on a graph plotting
magnetic induction and magnetic field. A hard disk device takes advantage of this it, which often occurs in
ferromagnetic materials. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a body lags in response to changes.
ANSWER: hysteresis
One model of this phenomenon was modified by Baber by adding degradation functions, and that
model states that this phenomenon becomes "pinched" near the middle of a member. Another model
of it relies on summing over a series of discrete elements, each with a switch-off and switch-on
threshold. In elastic systems, this phenomenon manifests itself as a need for more force for a given
amount of distension during a loading phase than an unloading phase. Those aforementioned models
are the Bouc-Wen and Preisach models, and a more famous example of this phenomenon has an offset
value known as the remnance and occurs in ferromagnetic systems, where the graph of magnetic field
strength versus magnetization forms a loop. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a lag in a
material occurs between the application and removal of an external force or field.
ANSWER: Hysteresis
In electrostatics, a method named for this term is used to compute complicated electric fields. In
optics, the size of this entity is proportional to the lens- focal length and the size of the reflected
object. Converging and diverging lenses produce two distinct types of these objects. Those types are
classified by whether (*) light rays actually pass through them, and are called real and virtual. For 10
points, give this five-letter term for an optical representation of something, synonymous with a picture.
ANSWER: image
For an inductor, this quantity is equal to j times the frequency times the inductance. For a lossless
line, the characteristic form of this quantity is equal to the square root of L over C. This quantity is
used to normalize both axes of a Smith chart. The maximum power transfer theorem states that
maximum power is transferred when this quantity of a source equals its complex conjugate across
the junction. The reflection coefficient is a function of this quantity between (*) two materials. The
inverse of this quantity is the admittance. This quantity is equal to i times the reactance plus the resistance.
For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized Z, a generalized form of electrical resistance applied to AC
circuits.
ANSWER: impedance [prompt on Z]
In waveguides, this quantity is proportional to the square root of permeability over permittivity times
either the wave number or the inverse of the wave number, depending on whether the wave is transverse
magnetic or transverse electric. In general, this quantity emerges as a constant of proportionality when the
Poynting theorem is used to calculate the power flow into a given surface. This complex quantity is
inversely proportional to the frequency for a capacitor and directly proportional to the frequency for an
inductor. This is the ratio of the complex voltage to the complex current. For 10 points, identify this
quantity composed of a real resistance and an imaginary reactance, the generalized resistance of alternating
current flow.
ANSWER: impedance
In the s-domain, an inductor with no initial conditions can be characterized as having this quantity of s times
the inductance. In an RLC circuit, this quantity is at a minimum at the resonance frequency. In an RC
circuit, it is inversely related to frequency. In Thevenin's theorem for AC circuits, a circuit can be replaced
by a single voltage source and a single value of this quantity. In a purely capacitive circuit it is equal to the
total capacitive reactance. One may combine values of this in series by adding the two complex forms.
Reactance is the imaginary part of this. For 10 points, name this quantity that for a pure resistor is
resistance, the opposition of a circuit to AC, written as Z.
ANSWER: electrical impedance [or complex impedance]
In Compton scattering, this entity's vector is parallel to the velocity vector between that of the original
photon and the newly emitted photon; in rocket science, its specific variety is used to compare the
efficiencies of engines in relation to propellant required, and, in classical mechanics, it is derived from
Newton's 2nd Law as the integral of the time-derivative of momentum with regards to time. FTP give the
name of the product of average force times time, or, simply, change in momentum.
ANSWER: Impulse
While actually formulated by Sturm, Bertrand's theorem deals with a situation when a set of these are
applied to a system. One form of it is linked with thrust, thought it is not a force like thrust, and ion thrusters
have very high values for this quantity. That form, which is defined per unit of propellant is the specific
type of this used to describe the efficiency of a rocket, while in classical mechanics, it is equal to the mass
times the change in velocity. For 10 points, identify this term which is classically the integral of force with
respect to time or the change in momentum upon impact.
ANSWER: impulse
The "specific" type of this physical value can be used to describe the efficiency of a propulsion system.
This term is sometimes applied to the Dirac delta function, giving rise to the use of a "train" of them. This
physical value shows that a small force applied for a long period of time can have the same momentum
change as a large force for a brief period of time. It is equal to the change in momentum. For 10 points,
identify this quantity also equal to the product of force and time.
ANSWER: impulse
The specific form of it is linked with thrust, thought it is not a force, and ion thrusters have very high values
for this quantity. That form is defined per unit of propellant, and it is used to describe the efficiency of a
rocket. In quantum mechanics, wave-particle duality defines it for waves, while in classical mechanics, it is
equal to the mass times the change in velocity. FTP, identify this term which is classically the integral of
force with respect to time or the change in momentum upon impact.
ANSWER: impulse
The relationship between this quantity and wavelength is defined by the Sellmeier equation, which models
dispersion. Taking the arctangent of the ratio of this quantity for two materials gives Brewster's angle. For
two materials, the ratio of the sines of the angles of incidence at an interface equals the ratio of this quantity
for both materials, a result that derives from Fermat's principle of least time. For 10 points, name this
physical property that can be determined from Snell's law, defined as the ratio of the speed of light in a
given medium to that in a vacuum.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index; prompt on n; prompt on IR; do not prompt on partial answers]
Electromagnetic metamaterials with a negative value for this property have been constructed, which may
see use in optically imaging things that are smaller than the diffraction limit. One is subtracted from this
quantity in the Lensmaker's equation. When this quantity is polarization-dependent, as in calcite, a "double"
type of this phenomenon may occur, called birefringence. This quantity measures how much slower light
becomes in a medium. At an interface, Snell's law relates the angles of incidence to these quantities. For 10
points, name this dimensionless property of a medium that measures how much a ray of light is bent when it
enters that medium.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index]
This quantity is approximately equal to the square root of the relative permittivity for most
materials. The main research in metamaterials is on ones that have negative values for this quantity.
The arctan of the ratio of this quantity is equal to Brewster's angle. The phase velocity is equal to the
speed of light divided by this quantity. Its ratio is equal to the (*) sines of the angle of incidence and
refraction according to Snell's law. For 10 points, name this quantity, symbolized n, that is defined as the
speed of light in a vacuum divided by the speed of light in a medium.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index]
One way of calculating this quantity compares it to a standard of this value which can be calculated
by the Edlen equation and involves finding the angle of minimum deviation. This quantity is modeled
by the sum of a constant term and a term inversely proportional to wavelength squared in the (*)
Cauchy equation, which is generalized to a three-term expansion by the Sellmeier equation. This quantity is
related to polarizability by the Lorentz-Lorenz equation, and it equals the square root of the product of
relative permeability and permittivity. The Fresnel equations describe light moving between media with
different values for this quantity, which is one for a vacuum. For 10 points, name this quantity which
appears in Snell's law, the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to that in a medium.
ANSWER: index of refraction (or refractive index; do not accept "refraction")
One paradox concerning this quantity, in which one calculation places it in the numerator but a formula for
an identical quantity places it in the denominator, was raised by Peierls. A complex version of this quantity
adds i plus the extinction coefficient, while one formula sets its square equal to a rational equation in terms
of the coefficients B1 through 3 and C1 through 3. This quantity can be negative in artificial metamaterials.
The arctangent of the ratio of this quantity for two materials gives Brewster's angle. Along with the sines of
the angle of incidence and this quantity's namesake angle, it is used in Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this
quantity that describes the speed of light in a medium, the namesake of a certain light-bending effect.
ANSWER: index of refraction [prompt on n]
Because relative permeability is usually one, this quantity can be approximated as the square root of
relative permittivity. This quantity can be negative in artificial metamaterials. The arctangent of the ratio of
this quantity for two different materials yields Brewster's angle. This quantity is 1.33 for water, and it is
calculated as the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of light in a substance. For 10 points,
identify this quantity appearing in Snell's law, which is symbolized n.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index; prompt on n until it is read]
Evanescent waves increase, rather than decrease, in material with a negative value for this quantity,
though such materials must be artificially engineered to have a negative permeability. This value appears
squared as a function of frequency in the Frank-Tamm formula, which gives the energy emitted by particles
traveling faster than the speed of light. The sine of the angle of incidence, divided by that of the angle of
transmission, gives the ratio of this quantity for two different materials, via Snell's Law. For 10 points,
name this measure of the speed of light in a material relative to that in a vacuum.
ANSWER: index of refraction [prompt on n]
This quantity is related to a specific wavelength, lambda, by A lambda squared plus B plus C
lambda to the minus two plus D lambda to the minus four, where A through D are material
constants, in Cauchy's equation. It is sometimes useful to derive this quantity as the square root of
relative permittivity times relative permeability. The arcsine of the ratio of this quantity for two
media gives the critical angle for (*) total internal reflection. The ratio of this quantity for two media is
equal to the ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence and sine of the angle of transmittance according to
Snell's law. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized n and equal to the ratio of the speed of light in a
vacuum to the speed of light in a material.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or n until it is read]
Electromagnetic metamaterials can have a negative value for this quantity. A material has two different
values for this in birefringence. This value is equal to the square root of the product of a medium's
permittivity and permeability. The ratio of this value for two media is related to the ratio of sines of its
namesake angles by Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the
speed of light in a medium, which is about 1.33 for water.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index; or ior]
One definition of this quantity gives it as the square root of the product of the relative permittivity
and the relative permeability. Birefringent materials are anisotropic, meaning their value for this
quantity is different along different axes. This quantity, about 1.33 for water, is found in a law which
states that the ratio of this value for two different materials is equal to the inverse of the ratio of the
sines of the angles of incidence; that law is called Snell's law. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to
the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of a light in a medium.
ANSWER: index of refraction
This quantity can be calculated as the square root of the ratio of the permittivity to the
permittivity of free space. A material that is birefringent (BYE-ruh-FRIN-jent) has multiple values
for this quantity. Snell's law gives the ratio of the angles of (*) incidence as a ratio of this quantity for
two mediums. It is equal to the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to that in a particular medium. For 10
points, identify this quantity that is important to a phenomenon that makes straws appear bent in water.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index]
According to the standard Forster theory, the Forster radius scales as the negative two-thirds power
of this quantity, meaning the rate of FRET evolves as the negative third power of this quantity.
Sulfurous polyimides and polyphosphonates are polymers with a very high value of this quantity. A
set of three B coefficients multiply the square of the wavelength in one statement used to calculate
this quantity, called the (*) Sellmeier equation. This quantity is equal to the square root of the product of
the relative permittivity and relative permeability, and the arctangent of the ratio of two of these quantities
gives the Brewster angle. It also equals c over the phase velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity that
appears multiplied by sine of theta on both sides of Snell's Law.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or n]
In minerals, the Gladstone-Dale relation can be used to compute this quantity, while the Lorentz-Lorenz
equation is used to relate it to polarizability. The Lensmaker's formula gives the focal length of a lens in
terms of the radii of curvature of the two lens surfaces and this quantity, while Brewster's angle is the
arctangent of the ratio of this quantity for each medium. Objects exhibiting birefringence possess multiple
values for this quantity, which also gives the ratio of the sines of the angles of incident light waves in
Snell's law. For 10 points, name this quantity, the ratio of the speed of light in some substance to the speed
of light in a vacuum.
ANSWER: Index of Refraction [accept Refractive Index]
This quantity in two materials can be compared using the Becke line test. This quantity can take on three
different values in biaxial materials, and it is related to wavelength in Cauchy's (koh-SHEEZ) equation.
This quantity is almost constant in fused silica, and equals the cosecant of the critical angle of a material.
This measure varies inversely with both the speed and the wavelength of light within a medium, with its
lowest possible value, one, used for vacuums. Name this quantity used in Snell's Law, the ratio of the speed
of light in a particular medium to the speed of light in a vacuum.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index; prompt on n before the end; prompt on a partial answer]
The Lorentz-Lorenz or Clausius-Mosotti equation for a gas ties this quantity to temperature and pressure.
This quantity is squared on the left side of the Sellmeier equations, which relate it to wavelength. For
substances with varying values for this quantity, one can use the Fresnel equations. It is approximated as the
square root of the product of the relative permeability and permittivity and it is equal to the speed of light
divided by the phase velocity of a dispersive material. For 10 points, name this quantity which appears in
Snell's Law, measuring the reduction of the speed of light in a material.
ANSWER: Index of Refraction or Refractive Index
The Abbe number is defined in terms of this quantity, which can be found using Cauchy's or Sellmeier's
equation. It is equal to the square root of the product of the relative permeability and the relative
permittivity of the material, and metamaterials could have a negative value for this quantity. The arctangent
of the ratio between two materials- values for this gives Brewster's Angle. It also appears in an equation that
follows from Fermat's Principle, Snell's Law, and it is defined as the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum
to in a medium. For 10 points, name this property which governs a namesake effect in which a beam of
light is bent as it passes between mediums.
ANSWER: Index of Refraction [or Refractive Index]
This value changes upon application of an electric field in the Kerr effect. Metamaterials have a negative
value for this quantity which gains a complex part to account for absorption in opaque materials. When this
value depends upon the polarity of light, different values of it can occur in a single material in a property
known as (*) birefringence. The ratio of this quantity for two different materials is equal to the ratio of the
angle of incidence and its namesake angle according to Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this ratio of the
speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of a light in a given material.
ANSWER: index of refraction or refractive index (prompt on "n")
A complex variety of this quantity includes an imaginary term proportional to the electrical
conductivity over the angular frequency. Cauchy's Formula gives this quantity as a function of one
over the wavelength squared. The Maxwell Relation approximates it as the square root of the
dielectric constant, and the ratio of this quantity for two materials is equal to the ratio of the (*) sines
of the incident angles by Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this quantity that gives the ratio of the speed of
light in a vacuum to the speed of light in a material.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index; prompt on n]
This value appears in both terms of the definition of the Lagrange invariant. Whether this value is in
the numerator or the denominator of the expression for momentum is the focus of the AbrahamMinkowski controversy. The square of this value minus one all over the square of this value plus two
is equal to four pi over three times number of molecules per unit volume times polarizability. The
square of this value is equal to one plus a series of terms with B times lambda squared over lambda
squared minus C according to the (*)
Sellmeier equation. The difference between its ordinary and extraordinary versions gives birefringence.
This value is on both sides of a law which relates the angle of incidence to another angle; that law is named
for Snell. For 10 points, name this value symbolized n that is used to measure how much light bends when it
moves between media.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index, accept n before mention]
This property is equivalent to the square root of the relative permeability times the relative permittivity. For
incidence angles greater than the arcsine of the ratio of these values for two media, total internal reflection
occurs. That is a specific case of a law that states that their ratio is inversely proportional to the sines of the
angles to the normal. This quantity, symbolized n, is 1.33 in water and exactly 1 in a vacuum. It can be
calculated using Snell's law. For 10 points, name this quantity that determines how much a light wave bends
when passing from one medium to another.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index]
A complex variety of this quantity includes an imaginary term proportional to the electrical
conductivity over the angular frequency. Cauchy's Formula gives this quantity as a function of one
over the wavelength squared. The Maxwell Relation approximates it as the square root of the
dielectric constant, and the ratio of this quantity for two materials is equal to the ratio of the (*) sines
of the incident angles by Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this quantity that gives the ratio of the speed of
light in a vacuum to the speed of light in a material.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index; prompt on n]
When a strong electric field acts on a transparent substance, variation of this quantity gives rise to the
Kerr effect, which produces birefringence of a transverse beam of light. When light passes through two
materials that share an interface and have different values for this property, Snell's law gives the angles
of incidence and refraction. For 10 points, name this quantity that equals the ratio between the velocity
of light in a vacuum and the velocity of light in a medium.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index]
This value, the square root of the product of the relative permeability and relative permittivity, is negative in
metamaterials, and multiple values for it appear in objects exhibiting birefringence. The angles of incidence
for two adjacent objects with different values of this are calculated by Snell's law. For 10 points, name this
dimensionless quantity measuring the ratio of the speed of light in a medium to that in a vacuum.
ANSWER: index of refraction [or refractive index]
An empirical equation used to find this value sets it equal to B plus the sum of B-n over a given wavelength
to the n-th power where n goes from two to infinity. The variation of this quantity with respect to
wavelength is given by the Abbe number. Minerals such as Icelandic spar have two values for this quantity
and are therefore birefringent. Water has a value of one and a third for this quantity, which is multiplied by
the sine of the angle of incidence is used in Snell's law. For 10 points, name this quantity that is defined as
the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light in a material.
ANSWER: Refractive index [or index of refraction]
This property can be used to create circuits that filter out a particular frequency from a complex signal. Its
namesake reactance is given by two pi times the signal frequency times this, and it is positive because the
phase of the voltage leads the phase of the current. For a single loop of wire, this is given by phi over I,
where phi is the magnetic flux through the loop and i is the current. FTP, name this property, commonly
measured in henries, whereby a changing current induces an electromotive force that opposes the change in
the current.
ANSWER: inductance
Losses due to a method used to increase this quantity include the hysteresis and eddy current loss.
Transformers use the "mutual" form of this quantity to step-up and step-down voltages. Its presence
causes current to lag voltage. This quantity is multiplied by j omega to obtain impedance. The energy
stored in devices with it is equal to half this quantity times current squared because the voltage
across such devices is equal to this quantity times the time-derivative of current. As it's often equal to
(*) permeability times cross-sectional area over length times number of coils squared, it can be increased
by inserting a core, like iron. This quantity determines the ability of an element to generate magnetic flux
linkage in response to a current. For 10 points, name this quantity whose SI unit is the Henry.
ANSWER: inductance
One form of this quantity has an interior contribution of one-half, or mu over 2 times mu naught, that
disappears at higher frequencies. When Y equals 0 due to the skin effect, one form of this quantity reduces
to another. The Gaussian unit for it is one ninth times ten to the negative eleven times the SI unit for it. The
phasor form of this quantity is equal to it times pi over 2. Leakage flux arises when a portion of a
transformer with this quantity is in series with a mutually-coupled pair of devices with this quantity.
Coming in "mutual" and "self" forms, this quantity is multiplied by one half I squared to obtain the energy
that can be stored in a magnetic field by a device drawn as a coil. For 10 points, name this quantity,
symbolized L, that is measured in henries.
ANSWER: inductance
Ferrous pans are heated through dissipation of the eddy currents caused by this phenomenon in a
namesake type of stove. The circuit elements which rely on this phenomenon have impedance
proportional to the current frequency. The namesake quantity of those elements that rely on this
phenomenon is the proportionality constant between voltage and the time derivative of current. The
Maxwell equation describing this phenomenon states that the (*) curl of the electric field equals the
negative partial derivative of the magnetic field with respect to time; that is Faraday's law of this
phenomenon. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which a time-varying magnetic field produces an
electric field, used by a circuit element whose strength is measured in henrys.
ANSWER: electromagnetic induction
This effect causes Kirchoff's loop rule to fail, as it is merely a special case of another rule governing
this effect. Motors based on this effect are based on the concept of eddy currents. The result of this
effect must be in the opposite direction of its cause by Lenz's Law. The most common law governing
this effect states that the emf is equal to the time derivative of magnetic flux and is known as Faraday's
Law. For 10 points, name this effect in which a magnetic field acting on a conductor causes current to
flow.
ANSWER: electromagnetic induction
Cap sealing takes advantage of this phenomenon, since this can be used to temporarily heat aluminum foil.
Explained soon after a related discovery by Hans Christian Oersted, its direction is given by Lenz's Law.
This is used in a squirrel cage or asynchronous motor. Name this phenomenon whose explanation is often
credited to Michael Faraday and which involves the creation of an electric potential difference by a change
in a magnetic field.
ANSWER: electromagnetic induction
One value important to understanding these devices can be calculated using Lundin's formula, and
for some devices is proportional to the Nagaoka coefficient. Ferrite beads can be used to cut down on
interference in them, and they can use a honeycomb or basket-weave configuration to cut down the
proximity effect. The impedance of these devices is directly proportional to the frequency, and their
voltage lead the current by one half pi. The square of the current is proportional to the (*) energy
held by these devices. These devices- reactance is caused by back-emf. Their energy stored is also
proportional to a namesake quantity symbolized L and measured in Henrys. For 10 points, name these
circuit elements which generate a magnetic field when a current passes through then, usually symbolized by
a coil, which along with resistors and capacitors make up an RLC circuit.
ANSWER: inductor [prompt on coil]
These devices can be simulated with op-amps because they are difficult to fit on integrated circuits.
Their voltage drop leads the input AC voltage by ninety degrees, and these devices can be tuned
using ferrite cores. Their addition in series or parallel is non-trivial because of their magnetic
coupling, and their behavior is governed by Lenz's law and (*) Faraday's Law. They are typically
solenoidal, and they store energy in a magnetic field by opposing a change in current. For 10 points, name
these circuit elements whose namesake property is measured in Henries, the opposite of capacitors.
ANSWER: Inductor [prompt on "coils" or "chokes" or any such nonsense]
The Q-factor for these devices is equal to their namesake reactance at resonance over resistance. The energy
stored in these devices is equal to one half the current squared times a namesake quantity. Voltage is equal
to a namesake quantity times the derivative of current in these devices, two of which are used to make a
transformer. These circuit components, which are represented by coils on a circuit diagram, store energy in
their magnetic fields. For 10 points, name these devices commonly composed of a wire solenoid, whose
namesake property is measured in Henries.
ANSWER: inductors
The namesake quantity of one of these devices is directly proportional to permeability of free space
and relative permeability of core material. A Litz wire is used to reduce skin effect losses in the radio
frequency type of these devices, which reduce the Q factor in resonant circuits. Two or more of these
with coupled magnetic flux can form a (*) transformer, and core losses of this device can take the form of
eddy currents. Faraday's Law describes the voltage induced in these components. Usually made of a wire
wrapped around a ferromagnet, for ten points, what are these circuit components that store energy in
magnetic fields, whose namesake property is measured in Henries?
ANSWER: inductors (accept solenoids)
Current lags voltage in these circuit components by ninety degrees. The potential energy stored in one of
these devices is equal to "one-half current squared times" a namesake quantity. These devices create a
reactance proportional to "2 pi times the frequency," causing them to resist the flow of alternating current.
These devices often consist of a coiled wire, and Faraday's Law describes how electric current through one
of these creates a magnetic field. For 10 points, name these devices which have a namesake property
symbolized L and measured in Henries.
ANSWER: inductors
The impedance of this device is directly proportional to frequency. When this component is in series
with a resistor, the voltage across it is equal to V times e to the negative t over tau. That equation states the
voltage across this device decreases with time. The quantity defining these devices adds in series and one
can also increase that quantity by inserting an iron core. For 10 points, name this circuit device whose
ability to store energy in a magnetic field is measured in henries and which is symbolized by an L.
ANSWER: inductor
Unipolar types of these were originally designed by Michael Faraday using a spinning disk; natural
examples of that type have been found in space, sometimes caused by the solar wind. These circuit devices
can be combined to form transformers, allowing voltage levels to be stepped up. In general, the strength of
these devices can be increased by increasing their core permeability, and their function can be explained
using Lenz's Law and the Maxwell-Faraday Law. The potential difference across these is proportional to
the derivative of current with respect to time, and they work by creating a magnetic field that creates a
potential difference. Name these devices often consisting of coils of wire.
ANSWER: inductors [prompt on solenoids]
The impedance of these components is directly proportional to angular frequency. The energy
stored in these components is proportional to the current squared. Their characteristic measure is
multiplied by the time derivative of current to yield the voltage. That measure can be increased by
inserting a (*) metal bar in the middle of these components. They are often found in circuits with resistors
and capacitors. For 10 points, identify these circuit components that store energy in a magnetic field.
ANSWER: inductor
Low-pass filters using these devices require fewer components than the corresponding high-pass filters
because the impedance of these devices in an AC circuit is directly proportional to their frequency. Two or
more of these devices are used to form a transformer. When this device is combined with a capacitor, it
forms an electronic resonator in the form of an LC circuit. The voltage across one is given by its namesake
property multiplied by the time derivative of current. For 10 points, name this circuit element, whose
namesake property is measured in Henries, and which stores energy in a magnetic field.
ANSWER: inductors
The type of this device that is used to filter out higher frequencies is a called a choke. The impedance
caused by one of these objects varies directly with frequency and causes current to lag behind voltage
in an AC circuit. The energy stored in one of these devices equals one half times its namesake
quantity times current squared. That quantity used to measure these objects equals electromotive
force divided by the derivative of current with respect to time, and the unit used to measure these
objects is equal to a volt second per ampere. These devices often have iron cores. Name these objects
whose strength is measured in henries, which can be made by coiling a wire.
ANSWER: inductors
These devices are typically used in traffic light sensors, and their impedance is proportional to angular
frequency. Like resistors, when these devices are arranged in series or in parallel their strength is combined.
The energy stored by these devices is proportional to one half times the current squared. The L in RLC
circuits refers to these devices. These devices, which include solenoids and toroids, are represented in
circuit diagrams by a coil. For 10 points, name these electrical devices that can store energy in a magnetic
field.
ANSWER: inductors
A "deep" form of scattering that has this characteristic uses high-energy electrons to probe hadrons,
confirming that they are composed of quarks. A process of this type results in a blue or red
wavelength shift termed Stokes and anti-Stokes lines in Raman scattering, and high-frequency photons
interact with matter and increase in wavelength in a process of this type. This property results when a
collision generates heat or requires deformation, and when this condition is total, two objects often stick
together. For 10 points, give this adjective describing a collision in which kinetic energy is not conserved.
ANSWER: inelastic [accept inelastic scattering before discussion of large-body mechanics begins]
Reference frames that lack this property may be subject to so-called "fictitious" forces. Special
relativity only applies to reference frames with this property, which must be non-accelerating. A
rotational quantity named for this property is equal to M R-squared for a point mass and is known
as its (*) "moment." Aristotle misunderstood this concept, which allows for objects to keep traveling in
straight lines. For 10 points, name this topic of Newton's first law, the tendency of a body to resist a change
in motion.
ANSWER: inertia [or word forms such as inertial; prompt on non-accelerating until it is read]
This word, rather than "gravitational," is used as an adjective to describe the mass term in Newton's Second
Law, and it also describes moving reference frames that do not accelerate. This property, in the absence of a
net force, is exemplified by the center of mass of a body moving at a constant velocity. For 10 points, name
this physical property that, in Newton's first law, is defined as a body's tendency to stay at rest before acted
upon by an outside force.
ANSWER: inertia [accept word forms like inertial; do not accept moment of inertia]
Navigation systems described by this word use gyroscopes to independently dead-reckon their own
trajectories. In all reference frames described by this word, Lorentz scalars are measured to have the same
length, and Newton's laws are true without fictitious forces. A rotational quantity described by this word is
related along three different axes in plane figures, according to the perpendicular-axis theorem. Eotvos was
the first to prove a result underlying general relativity: that the gravitational form of mass was equal to this
form of mass. For 10 points, name this tendency of a body at rest to remain at rest, the subject of Newton's
first law of motion, which is measured by mass.
ANSWER: inertia [or word forms; or inertial navigation systems; or inertial reference frames; or moment of inertia; or inertial mass; do not accept anything containing "non-inertial"]
In general relativity, a geodesic described by this term implies a curved manifold. All frames of
reference described by this term are in constant motion relative to one another. The rotational analog of
mass is known as the moment of this. Isaac Newton defined it as an object maintaining a constant velocity
in the absence of net external forces in his First Law of Motion. For 10 points, name this resistance to
change in motion measured by mass.
ANSWER: inertial
This is the order of phase transitions that are continuous and break no symmetries. The
ionization energy can be derived from Rydberg's formula by setting the principal quantum number
of the final state to this value. In quantum field theory, renormalization is used to remove points with
this value. The Rayleigh-Jeans law predicts that the energy of a blackbody approaches this (*) value
at low wavelengths. When considering the potential energy of a group of point charges, the energy at this
point is set to zero. This is the density of the singularity at the center of a black hole, because it has a large
mass and zero volume. For 10 points, name this value, which can be obtained by dividing by zero.
ANSWER: infinite [accept equivalents]
In tokamaks in which a separatrix exists, the safety factor obtains this value at the separatrix. By analyzing
the two-dimensional Ising model, Kramers and Wannier established that the specific heat took on this value
at the Curie point. This value is obtained when computing the occupancy number for the ground state of a
Bose-Einstein condensate, and classical calculations of electron self-energies also yield this value. In
quantum field theory, terms having this value are removed through the process of renormalization, and this
value is also obtained for the energy radiated by a black body when extrapolating the Rayleigh-Jeans law to
higher frequencies. For 10 points, identify this value attained by the classical metric of general relativity at
the singularity of a black hole, in which things get unquantifiably large.
ANSWER: infinity [accept word forms, prompt on divergence]
Fischer and Schutzhold developed a simulation of this process in a Bose-Einstein condensate. This
process- original formulation relied on bubble nucleation, which lead to the "graceful exit" problem;
Steinhardt addressed that issue with the "slow-roll" variety of this process. A chaotic version of this
process would result in fractal structuring and was proposed to be still continuing according to Linde.
Proposed to solve the flatness, horizon, and monopole problems, evidence for this process includes the
existence of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background. FTP, name this process proposed by Alan
Guth, in which the universe expanded very rapidly after the big bang.
ANSWER: Cosmic inflation
Paul Steinhardt is one of those who proposed a "slow-roll" variety of this process, which utilized a scalar
field in a potential energy well. A measurement of the B-modes would provide evidence of the gravitational
radiation produced as a result of this process. Andrei Linde's modified theory of this process proposes that it
is ongoing, and this process was proposed to resolve the flatness, horizon, and monopole problems. This
process also helps explain structure growth in the universe, and evidence for the occurrence of this process
is provided by the anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background. First formally proposed by Alan Guth,
for ten points, identify this theory which states that the early universe expanded very rapidly.
ANSWER: cosmic inflation
The spectral index n-sub's is one parameter in this theory that quantifies its departure from scale invariance.
Early versions of this theory involved false vacuum states that failed to account for the radiation needed for
reheating. Newer models use a scalar field with a namesake parameter involving the ratio of the second time
derivative of the Hubble parameter to the product of the Hubble parameter and its first time derivative: the
"slow roll" parameter. This theory answers the question of why the universe is isotropic if different areas
are not in causal contact, known as the horizon problem. The main process this theory predicts was finished
by 10 to the negative 32 seconds after the Big Bang. Alan Guth developed, for 10 points, what theory which
posits a rapid expansion of the early universe?
ANSWER: cosmic inflation theory
Borde, Vilenkin and another scientist name a theorem that allows this process to apparently violate
the weak energy condition by having a boundary at a finite beginning of time. It was originally
posited that the Higgs field was the driving force behind this process but it is now though to be driven
by a scalar field that may not have a zero energy state. Uniformity of regions separated by light-time
greater than the age of the universe and the closeness of the universe density to the critical value were
the main reasons for positing it, and this process occurred from 10^-36 and 10^-32 seconds after the Big
Bang. For 10 points, name this theory proposed by Alan Guth which proposes a brief period of very rapid
expansion in the early universe.
ANSWER: Cosmic Inflation
The existence of an "Axis of Evil" in the CMB may indicate that this process occurred in a certain
direction, though the occurrence of this process would imply that the universe is isotropic. The occurrence
of this process implies that the gravitational collapse of quantum fluctuations lead to the formation of
large-scale structures, and the gravitational radiation produced by this process is encoded in the B-modes of
the CMB. The original formulation of this process had a metastable supercooled state terminated by a
process of bubble nucleation via quantum tunneling, though that model suffered from the graceful exit
problem. Linde proposed a slow-roll version of this process, and it was originally postulated to solve the
flatness, horizon, and monopole problems. Originally proposed by Alan Guth, for 10 points, name this
process of rapid exponential expansion in the early universe, immediately after the big bang.
ANSWER: cosmic inflation
The fingerprint region is found in this section of the electromagnetic spectrum. 2000 inverse-centimeters,
also known as wavenumbers, occurs as this type of radiation, which has enough energy to excite vibrational
transitions in molecules. The Paschen series lies entirely in this range of the electromagnetic spectrum. The
"pit" of pit vipers is evolved to detect this form of electromagnetic radiation. Greenhouse gases mainly
absorb this type of radiation, which is absorbed by thermoreceptors. Microwaves are slightly less energetic
than this region. For 10 points, name this form of radiation which has wavelength just longer than red light.
ANSWER: infrared spectrum/light/radiation [or IR; or IR spectroscopy before "this section" in the first sentence]
The use of a photographic filter exposed to light in this part of the spectrum gives the appearance of
a surreal glowing foliage in the Wood effect. It was first predicted by Emilie du Chatelet, and FSO
takes advantage of this part of the spectrum over the use of cables. One technique performed with
this phenomenon identifies specific molecules in the (*) fingerprint region, while the near type of it is
used in night vision goggles. For ten points, identify this form of electromagnetic radiation used in
spectroscopy and thermal imaging cameras that has longer wavelengths than red light.
ANSWER: infrared or IR light/waves/radiation
This form of radiation is studied by the Spitzer Space Telescope and the Herschel Space
Observatory. This kind of radiation can incite vibrations in chemical bonds, resulting in a
wavenumber readout in its namesake spectroscopy. This kind of light also forms the basis for
hyperspectral and (*) thermal imaging. Night vision also relies on this kind of light, which has
wavelength of 0.74 to 300 micrometers. For 10 points, identify this form of light with wavelength longer
than visible light.
ANSWER: infrared light [or infrared radiation; or IR]
This part of the spectrum is the focus of the SOFIA project which became operational in 2010, long after
the Kuiper [KIE-per] Airborne Observatory became obsolete. The far part of it is studied by the Herschel
Space Observatory, which has made discoveries about protostars to improve understanding of star
formation. This spectrum is used to search for Brown Dwarfs because they are too cold to radiate significant
visible light. Name this part of the spectrum a little above 0.75 micrometers, on the other end of the visible
spectrum from ultraviolet.
ANSWER: infrared
Long, thin elliptical galaxies suffer from the "firehose" type of this phenomenon. Stars that appear
on a feature of the H-R diagram with this in the name contain doubly-ionized helium in their
atmospheres. Orbits near fixed points in systems of linear differential equations have this property
the eigenvalues of the associated matrix have real parts greater than zero. This word names a (*)
"strip" in the HR diagram that contains variable stars. This condition also occurs when the second
derivative of the potential energy is less than zero for a system with no net forces or torques. For 10 points,
name this property of a system, which is also used to describe an equilibrium that is not resistant to
perturbation.
ANSWER: instability [accept anything saying that the system is unstable]
These objects, which are often assembled in modular cap and pin designs, can fail due to thresholds
on "puncture" and "flashover." One type of these objects are transition metal oxides with a Coulomb
potential more than twice the number of neighboring atoms times the transfer integral and were
predicted by Nevill (*) Mott. One of these materials separates two conductors in a capacitor. These
materials, which possess a characteristic breakdown voltage, have a large band gap due to their tightly
bound valence electrons. For 10 points, name these materials, also called dielectrics, that resist current flow.
ANSWER: insulators [accept dielectrics before mention]
One class of these materials has special surface states protected by time-reversal symmetry, and are known
as the "topological" type of these materials. These materials must have an even integer number of electrons
per unit cell, which means that these materials have a perfectly filled valence band, above which there is a
large band gap. These materials may exhibit an electric arc when a voltage larger than the breakdown
voltage causes a charge to leap across them, but under normal conditions have an extremely high resistivity.
For 10 points, identify these materials such as glass and rubber that block electrical current, in contrast to
conductors.
ANSWER: electrical insulators
This phenomenon causes an increase in resistivity due to electrons scattering in circular paths in
weak localization. Inside the coherence length this phenomenon produces a speckle pattern. This
phenomenon can be studied in the delayed choice and quantum eraser experiments. The LIGO
detector uses this phenomenon to search for (*) gravitational waves using an apparatus containing two
long perpendicular arms and a beam splitter. The effect of this phenomenon is maximized when the path
length difference between an observer and two in-phase sources is an integer or half integer multiple of the
wavelength. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which two waves superimpose to form a new wave
with smaller or larger amplitude, which can be "constructive" or "destructive."
ANSWER: interference [accept "quantum interference"]
A type of filter named for its use of this phenomenon consists of a space between two semi-reflective planar
media and selects for frequencies around two times the phase speed times the space width. This behavior is
governed by a parameter equal to the ratio of twice path length difference to wavelength; its namesake
condition is the requirement that that parameter equal the ratio of integers times the sine of a characteristic
angle. For 10 points, name this phenomenon demonstrated by the Young double slit experiment in which
waves add according to their phases leading to maxima and minima where the constructive and destructive
forms occur, respectively.
ANSWER: interference
Colors can be seen in soap bubbles and oil because of the "thin-film" type of this phenomenon. The
"co-channel" type of this phenomenon occurs when frequencies are too similar. When two waves are
superpositioned such that their crests meet, they undergo an amplitude increase due to the "constructive"
form of this phenomenon. The electromagnetic type of this phenomenon is used to jam cell phones. For 10
points, name this phenomenon from optics and communications that disrupts wave signals.
ANSWER: wave interference
Two altered Wollaston prisms are used in one of these devices that are often employed under high
magnification and is named for Nomarski. Mirau developed a modification of one of these devices, and a
reference is supplied to these devices by the local oscillator. One of these with two parallel plates can be
used to observe the Zeeman effect, and another of these devices commonly used for rotation sensing is
named for Georges Sagnac. No fringe shift was found in a study that utilized them, thus giving positive
evidence for time dilation. They were also used to disprove luminiferous ether theory. For 10 points, name
these devices that measure phase differences in light, which were used in the Kennedy-Thorndike and
Michelson-Morley experiments.
ANSWER: interferometers
Antoine Labeyrie developed a spherical form of this device for use in its namesake speckle field in
astronomy. The Atacama ALMA project uses a series of radiotelescopes to form the astronomical variety of
this device. They work by changing path length or refractive index along a path, and perhaps the bestknown example consisted of a coherent light source, a couple of normal mirrors, and a half-silvered mirror.
For 10 points, identify this instrument used to combine waves out of phase, the best-known example of
which was used to disprove the idea of lumeniferous ether in the Michelson-Morley experiment.
ANSWER: interferometer
A perfect elastomer may be defined as a polymer in which this quantity is independent of the
extension of the random coil. An infinitesimal change in this quantity is equal to TdS - PdV. The
slope of this quantity over temperature yields the heat capacity at constant volume; also like
temperature, this state function remains constant in an isothermal process. For a monatomic ideal
gas, this quantity is equal to 3/2 times nRT. When the product of PV is added to this quantity, (*)
enthalpy is obtained. If the system is isolated, this quantity cannot change via the first law of
thermodynamics, which gives it as the sum of the heat and work done on a system. For 10 points, give this
measure of the total amount of energy possessed by a thermodynamic system, symbolized U.
ANSWER: internal energy [prompt on U until mentioned; accept just internal after "energy" is mentioned]
This device is slated to be replaced by a Low Earth orbit device called OPSEK. SpaceX's Dragon
recently became the first commercial spacecraft to rendezvous at this location. This artificial satellite
includes orbital regions named for the United States and Russia, and scientists here can repair spacecraft
headed for the Moon. For ten points, name this artificial satellite whose maintenance is the result of
cooperation between Japan, the United States, Canada, Europe, and Russia.
ANSWER: International Space Station
The fixing of the Josephson constant may soon lead to the revision of one component of this system, while a
proposal to base another part of this system on Planck's constant rather than the IPK is already being
considered. The magnetic force between two parallel wires defines one component of this system, and in
1960 another standard used an orange-red spectral line of krypton-86. Another component of this system
was defined by a clock based on caesium-133 atoms. Incorporating the older metric system and still not
official in the United States, name this collection of standard science units that includes the kilogram, meter,
kelvin, and ampere.
ANSWER: International System of Units [or SI; or Systeme International d-Unites; accept MKS(A); prompt on metric system before it is mentioned]
Field's stability criterion for this region, expressed in terms of its cooling function, supports a
pressure-balanced, two-component model of it. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in this region may
be responsible for some of its namesake diffusion absorption bands. Most of its molecules are found
in dark (*) clouds, which include GMCs and Bok globules. Absorption and emission of the 21-centimeter
line in its neutral portions allows mapping of the rotation curve of the Milky Way. After crossing the
heliopause, Voyager 1 is now in this region beyond the influence of the solar wind. For 10 points, name this
dust and gas that fills the space between stars.
ANSWER: Interstellar Medium [or ISM; or Interstellar Space]
For a two-body system under a force of this kind, the Runge-Lenz vector is exactly conserved.
According to Bertrand's theorem, among central forces, these are the only decaying ones that admit stable,
closed orbits. Conservative forces of this type correspond to potentials that fall off directly with distance
because taking the gradient of such a potential yields a radial vector with this dependence on radius. For 10
points, name this type of force that decreases with a certain power of distance, as exemplified by gravity
and electromagnetism.
ANSWER: inverse-square forces [or equivalents like one over distance squared; or one over r-squared; or r-to-the-minus-two]
This object's interactions with the magnetosphere of its host body create a plasma torus and its
crossing of magnetic field lines creates an arc of current to its host's poles called the flux tube. This
body has a tenuous atmosphere of sulfur dioxide and pockets of hydrated minerals have been
identified on this body's Gish Bar Mons. Other notable features include crater-like depressions called
paterae; notable examples of which include (*) Tvashtar, Loki and Pele. This object is subject to a 4:2:1
orbital resonance with Europa and Ganymede which results in the tidal heating of this moon's interior. The
innermost satellite of Jupiter, FTP, identify this Galilean moon, the most actively volcanic object in the
solar system.
ANSWER: Io
Masubi and Amirani are two notable features of this object; those are dust varieties, in contrast with
Tvashtar, which some times termed a stealth one. Laplace created a theory to explain its orbital resonance
with two other similar objects, and Pioneer 11 discovered a strong belt of radiation from a larger nearby
object that completely envelopes this one. This object's orbit is extremely elliptical in nature, due to its
orbital resonance with two other moons of its planet, which creates extreme fluctuations in the crust of this
moon, therefore generating an extreme amount of internal heat, which manifests itself in violent ejections of
sulfur and sulfur dioxide. For 10 points, what is this moon, the most geologically active object in the Solar
System, and the innermost Galilean moon of Jupiter?
ANSWER: Io
If the fractional preponderance of this property is denoted X, then X squared over quantity one minus X is
proportional to the three-halves power of the temperature times a Boltzmann factor, according to the Saha
equation. The absence of Gunn-Peterson troughs in younger quasars indicates that this phenomenon, driven
by star ignition, black hole accretion, and particle decay occurred on a universe-wide scale for a second
time between redshifts of 10 and 6. When a gas with this property meets the criterion that its density times
the volume of a Debye sphere is much greater than 1, it will behave as a plasma. In neutral atomic
hydrogen, the energy that must be absorbed for this phenomenon to occur is 13.6 electron-volts. For 10
points, identify this phenomenon in which an electron is separated from an atom, leaving behind a positively
charged entity.
ANSWER: ionization [accept word forms]
This element is found at relatively low velocities in Type Ia supernovae and is believed to be the end
product of the supersonic detonation of the progenitor white dwarf material. It also forms roughly the
innermost 1.5 solar masses of massive stars near the end of their lives. Both of these occurrences stem from
the fact that this element has the highest binding energy per nucleon. The sixth most abundant element in
the universe, for 10 points name this metal used by humans for tools since the time of the Hittites, atominc
number 26.
ANSWER: iron
According to Kelvin's minimum kinetic energy theorem, the dynamics of this type in a simply connected
region have less kinetic energy than other dynamics with the same normal motion. If a fluid has this
property, then the pressure constant is the same for all streamlines allowing one to use Bernoulli's equation
to relate pressure and velocity anywhere in the flowfield. Flows that are incompressible and this have stream
functions that must obey Laplace's equation. Stokes' Theorem shows that if a fluid has this property then
gamma is equal to zero. This property means that the partial derivative of v with x minus the partial
derivative of u with y is zero. Potential flows are inviscid and have this property, as one can assign a
velocity potential function. For 10 points, name this property of a fluid such that the vorticity is zero.
ANSWER: irrotational [accept potential before mentioned; prompt on Laplacian before mentioned]
A problem associated with this model asks for the number of color patterns for a rectangular grid of
red and green unit squares given a prescribed number of boundary edges. Unlike in the (*)
Heisenberg model, spin direction is fixed and the spin variable can only assume two values. When the
interaction between neighboring spins favors anti-parallel alignment, the ordered state is anti-ferromagnetic
instead of ferromagnetic. For 10 points, name this model of statistical mechanics.
ANSWER: Ising model
The energy of a Hopfield neural network is calculated by noting that the network is equivalent to it.
Formulated in matrix terms, the log of its largest eigenvalue is proportional to the free energy. Using a
Metropolis algorithm with staying probability e to the negative beta times delta E can be used to solve these
models. Istrail found that the three-dimensional versions of them are unsolvable. The energy in this system
is equal to the sum of S sub I times S sub J times an interaction term J sub ij. A 2-dimensional version of it
was solved by Onsager. Sherrington and Kirkpatrick added frustration terms to it in order to model spin
glasses. Its critical fluctuations correctly model the behavior at the critical point. For 10 points, name this
model which is used to model magnetic materials as a collection of spins.
ANSWER: the Ising model
In power generation, this term indicates a constant frequency of electricity, and in horology, clocks that are
unaffected by changes in the driving force are this. In dynamic system theory, any oscillator for which
frequency is independent of amplitude can be called this, and this is a type of data flow for the Universal
Serial Bus for computers. The division of time into equal parts by a language, usually for rhythm, is this in
linguistics. This type of cyclotron adjusts its field strength to balance out relativistic increases in mass.
Because the period of a pendulum is constant regardless of mass and angle, the path of the pendulum can be
described by this word. Identify this term constructed from the Greek roots for "same" and "time."
ANSWER: isochronous
With Euler, one man from this modern-day country co-names a constant related to the harmonic series. This
country housed the receiving end of the OPERA neutrino experiment, and one man from this country names
a non-SI unit of pressure equivalent to (*) millimeters of mercury. A scientist from this country was the lead
developer of the nuclear reactor, and several seismologists were convicted in this country in 2012. One
physicist from this country may have dropped cannonballs off a tower near the university where he worked
to test his theory of gravity. For 10 points, name this European country, the home of Fermi and Galileo.
ANSWER: Italy
The f-sub-zero-1790 particle was recently detected in a usually suppressed decay mode of this
particle, and most hadronic decays of this particle are suppressed because those modes have a
Feynman diagram that can be split by cutting internal gluon lines; that is an application of the OZI
rule. This particle was predicted as an excited state of another (*) particle whose existence was posited
to suppress a Z-boson-mediated flavor decay via the GIM mechanism. It was originally discovered at the
SPEAR accelerator at SLAC and at Brookhaven. This particle was discovered independently by Burton
Richter and Samuel Ting as part of the November revolution, and this particle is the first excited state in a
series For 10 points, name this particle that consists of a charm quark and its antiquark.
ANSWER: J/psi meson
Experimental realization of this effect was realized by Rowell and Anderson using a thin film of tin
oxide. The phase of this phenomenon in one system can be calculated from the perturbed sineGordon equation. The arm of the quantum metrology triangle linking the variable U with the
frequency is bridged by this effect, while the other two arms bridged by the single electron transport
effect and the Hall effect. Analogizing this effect to a damped pendulum gives a damping equal to the
Stewart-McComber parameter. The value h (*) over 2 e is the namesake constant of this phenomenon,
and two devices using this effect are placed in a loop to form a highly sensitive magnetometer called a
SQUID. In this effect, a supercurrent tunnels through an insulator. For 10 points, name this effect, a form of
tunneling between two superconductors named for a Welsh physicist.
ANSWER: Josephson effect
Reinhardt and Clark researched an analog of this effect in the collisions of Bose-Einstein condensates, and
Andreev bound states can contribute to it. An example of the internal type of this effect is the longitudinal
NMR in super-fluid helium. It allows a precise determination of the ratio e/h, and this effect can exist in AC
and DC varieties. This basis for a SQUID can detect very small magnetic fields and was predicted by its
namesake 22-year-old Brit. For 10 points, name this effect that can occur when a few nanometers thick layer
of aluminum oxide separates two superconductors, which allows Cooper pairs to tunnel across the junction.
ANSWER: Josephson effect
The I-V curve of one of these devices shows a vertical jump named for Shapiro. In one model
of these devices, they are governed by a parameter theta that "slides" down a washboard
potential. Considering the phase angle of these devices as equivalent to the angle of displacement
of a pendulum leads to an equation in which these devices are damped by the StewartMcComber parameter. Putting a pair of these devices in parallel creates a device used to measure
very weak magnetic fields. A constant of proportionality governing this effect is equal to one
over the flux quantum. For 10 points, name these devices that operate using a namesake effect in
which Cooper pairs tunnel across a junction of superconductors.
ANSWER: Josephson junction
In his most famous paper, this man rejected the caloric theory of Carnot (kahr-NOH) and Clapeyron (clapayron) on theological grounds. For ideal gases, an increase in volume that performs no work produces no
temperature change by his namesake expansion. Lord Kelvin developed the absolute temperature scale in
part to better test this man's ideas, and together the two scientists name an effect by which the temperature
of gas changes as it is throttled. His best known experiment used ropes to transmit kinetic energy from
masses to a sealed vat of water, and his key work is titled On the mechanical equivalent of heat. The unit
named after this person is based on a force of one Newton acting for one meter. Name this physicist who
was the first to explicitly state the law of conservation of energy and consequently has the SI unit of work
and energy named for him.
ANSWER: James Prescott Joule
The law of this system states that n times p is equal to n-sub-i squared times e to the q times V-sub-A
over k T. A hyperabrupt form of this system is used in varactors. This system undergoes two types of
capacitance: diffusion and its namesake type. A plot of the current density of this system looks like a pair
of scissors. It contains a single space-charge region. The first solar cells were based on this system.
Increasing the doping on one side of this system pushes the depletion region further into the other side. This
system can be in equilibrium or forward or reverse bias. For 10 points, identify this system upon which
simple diodes are based.
ANSWER: p-n junction
Orbiting this planet are the irregular Carme and Himalia groups of satellites, and its atmosphere contains a
feature called Oval BA. The rings of this planet gain much of their material from the moons Metis and
Adrastea, while another of its moons is the reddest object in the solar system. It is responsible for the
Kirkwood gap and its atmosphere is grouped into regions called zones and belts. Its rotation is fastest
among the planets and it is associated with the Trojan asteroids. This planet was impacted by Shoemaker-
Levy 9 and is home to a large anticyclone called the Great Red Spot. For 10 points, name this largest planet
in the Solar System.
ANSWER: Jupiter
The first trihydrogen ions ever observed were found in the aurorae of this planet. Anomalously high
amounts of argon, krypton, and xenon in its atmosphere likely come from captured Kuiper Belt objects. It
has the shortest period of rotation of planets in the solar system. In 1994, plumes in this planet's atmosphere
were caused by the fragments of the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet. Its four largest moons were discovered
independently by Simon Marius and Galileo; the biggest of those is Ganymede. For 10 points, name this
fifth planet from the Sun with a Great Red Spot.
ANSWER: Jupiter
Orbital resonances with this planet caused the formation of Kirkwood gaps. This planet's four
innermost moons include Amalthea and Adrastea. This planet's orbit includes asteroids named
Trojans. Pioneer 10 and 11 were the first spacecraft to visit this planet. In 1994, this planet was hit
by the comet (*) Shoemaker-Levy 9. A notable feature on this planet is the Great Red Spot, and its moons
include Io and Ganymede. For 10 points, name this largest planet in the Solar System.
ANSWER: Jupiter
Places where this planet's gravitational pull balances out that of the sun are home to its moons 588
Achilles and 4709 Ennomos, members of the planet's "Greek" and "Trojan" camps respectively.
Orbital resonances in this object produce (*) Kirkwood Gaps in the nearby asteroid belt, and in 1994 the
comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 was ripped apart by its immense gravitational pull. Our solar system's largest
moon, along with three others also named for the man who discovered them in the seventeenth century,
orbit this planet. For 10 points, name this planet orbited by Ganymede, the largest in the solar system.
ANSWER: Jupiter
Small dust particles comprise this body's toroidal "halo" ring and its very faint "gossamer" ring. The Oval
BA is a large storm within the atmosphere of this planet. In July 1994, scars were visible in this object's
atmosphere due to its collision with the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9. Moons of this planet include the reddest
object of the Solar System called Amalthea, as well as one another whose tidal interactions with it cause it
to be the most volcanic object in the solar system. This planet's most notable feature is a persisting cloudy
anti-cyclonic storm in its southern hemisphere. For 10 points, name this fifth planet from the sun, which
contains the Great Red Spot.
ANSWER: Jupiter
This object has the largest number of known Trojan asteroids, and in 1994 it was hit by a comet discovered
by and named for two amateur astronomers, Shoemaker-Levy 9. One feature on this planet orbits with a
period of about six days; that hurricane-like storm in its southern hemisphere is known as the Great Red
Spot. Its moons include Callisto, Europa, Io, and Ganymede. For 10 points, name this planet, the largest in
the solar system.
ANSWER: Jupiter
The main rings of this planet were formed primarily by material ejected from its satellites Adrastea and
Metis, whereas its more distant ring was formed by Thebe and Amalthea. This more distant ring system is
often referred to as its Gossamer rings. Furthermore, this planet observed an impact event in 1994 when an
object entered the Roche limit of the planet, where it disintegrated and bombarded the planet. Its core is
thought to consist of metallic hydrogen, and the storm Oval BA is one of the main features of its
atmosphere, along with the Great Red Spot. For ten points, name this largest planet in the solar system
which is the fourth brightest object in the night sky.
ANSWER: Jupiter
Orbital resonances with this object lead to Kirkwood gaps in the main asteroid belt. Shoemaker-Levy 9
collided with this body, whose fourth and fifth Lagrangian points are occupied by Trojans. Its inner
satellites include Metis, Thebe, and Amalthea, while one of its larger satellites might have a subsurface
ocean of liquid water that could harbor life, and another is the largest moon in the solar system. Orbited by
the Galileo spacecraft, its largest moons are Callisto, Io, Ganymede, and Europa. For 10 points, name this
planet with a Great Red Spot, the largest in the solar system.
ANSWER: Jupiter
One of this planet's moons is home to Pwyll Crater, and that moon is believed to have a layer of liquid water
below its surface; other moons of this planet include Adrastea and Metis. The Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet
was ripped apart upon entering the gravitational field of this planet, and the largest moon in the solar system
revolves around this planet. Home to such Galilean moons as Europa and Ganymede, this is, for 10 points,
what planet, the largest in our solar system?
ANSWER: Jupiter
The Amalthea (al-muh-THAY-uh) and Thebes gossamer rings are part of this planet's ring system.
Pioneer 10 was the first probe to explore this planet in 1973. In Cosmos, Carl Sagan imagined the
possibility of "floaters" living on this planet. This planet was hit by the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet. Two
storms in this planet's atmosphere are Oval BA and the Great Red Spot. Io and Europa are two of the
Galilean moons that orbit this planet. For 10 points, name the largest planet in our solar system.
ANSWER: Jupiter
This planet's ring system is maintained by its four innermost moons, which include Adrastea and Amalthea.
Most of the material in its magnetosphere is supplied by ionized sulfur dioxide gas. That gas is produced by
volcanic activity on one of its moons. The Voyager space probes documented the volcanic activity on that
moon, Io, which is one of the four Galilean satellites. This gas giant is host to a centuries-long reddish
storm, the Great Red Spot. For 10 points, name the largest planet in the Solar System.
ANSWER: Jupiter
In 2011, a Canadian teenager demonstrated that this planet could cast a shadow on Earth and the
Juno probe was launched to study its poles. The Galileo probe observed the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9
colliding with this planet in 1994. In 2000, (*) Oval BA appeared in this gas giant's South Temperate
Belt, near the largest storm in the solar system. The Great Red Spot is on, for 10 points, what largest planet
in the solar system?
ANSWER: Jupiter
One body orbiting this planet shines with a magnitude similar to that of Venus from Earth. That object, the
reddest object in the Solar System, is this planet's moon Amalthea. The masses of exoplanets and brown
dwarfs are often given in relation to the mass of this planet, whose L4 and L5 Lagrangian points are
occupied by Trojan asteroids. This planet has the fastest period of rotation, and images taken by the
Voyager 1 probe demonstrated extreme volcanic activity on Io, one of its Galilean Moons. Containing a
Great Red Spot, for 10 points, name this 5th planet from the Sun, the largest planet in the Solar System.
ANSWER: Jupiter
The visible surface of this planet is divided into lightly colored zones and dark colored belts. This
planet was studied by the Galileo probe. Although not Saturn, this planet has two "gossamer" rings
that are composed of material from its moons Thebe and Amalthea. Asteroids located at two of the
Lagrange points of this planet are called (*) trojans. A giant anticyclonic storm located south of the
equator on this planet is its Great Red Spot. For 10 points, identify this gas giant, the largest planet in the
Solar System.
ANSWER: Jupiter
This planet is surrounded by a plasma torus generated by the volcanism of one of its moons, and
one of its innermost moons is unusually red in color. That moon is named Amalthea, and one of its
atmospheric features is Oval BA. This planet was the target of the (*) Galileo probe, which observed
the unusual cracked ice on the surface of Europa and discovered a magnetic field around its largest moon,
Ganymede. For 10 points, identify this planet home to the Great Red Spot, the largest in the solar system.
ANSWER: Jupiter
One moon of this planet crossed by linea has a smooth and icy surface, leading some to believe that it
could support life. Its orbit is shared by a group of asteroids called Trojans. In 1994 astronomer were able
to observe the comet Shoemaker Levy-9 collide with this planet. The four Galilean moons, including the
solar system's largest moon Ganymede (GAH-nih-mead), orbit this planet which is also home to a giant
storm called the Great Red Spot. For 10 points, name this largest moon in the solar system.
ANSWER: Jupiter
In 2001 one of these objects was discovered to have housed a region made up entirely of silicate
known as the Gish Bar. One of these objects was given the designation 1999 UX18 and is one of the
dimmest objects in the night sky. In addition to Callirrhoe, one of these bodies names a group that
contains all irregularly shaped objects that cannot form spheroids, the Ananke Group. One of the
largest of these objects is home to the Valhalla and Lofn impact sites, and that body is the most
heavily cratered object in the Solar System. These bodies which were studied extensively by the Pioneer 10
spacecraft also include one object which is believed to have a subsurface ocean of water. The largest of the
innermost of these objects has many active volcanoes. For 10 points identify these objects which include
Metis and Himelia, the four most famous of which include those discovered by Galileo, Io and Europa.
ANSWER: Moons of Jupiter [accept Satellites of Jupiter]
A specific group of these objects was used by Giovanni Cassini to create ephemeris tables to help sailors
determine longitude. Ole Romer demonstrated that light has a finite speed by observing one of these
objects. The innermost group of these objects is the Amalthea group, and the Himalia group is the
outermost group of these objects orbiting in prograde. NASA considered the possibility of establishing a
base on one of these objects in its Human Outer Planet Exploration project. The four largest of these objects
are named for Galileo. For 10 points, name these objects that include Io, Europa, and Ganymede, a group of
satellites that orbit a planet with a Great Red Spot.
ANSWER: moons of Jupiter [accept Galilean moons or Cosmica Sidera or Medicea Sidera before "Amalthea"; prompt on "moons"]
The large impact crater Valhalla is located on one of these objects, and another contains Conamara Chaos,
which is a region of chaotic terrain. Some of these objects are divided into Ananke [uh-NAN-kee] and
Carme [KAHR-mee] groups. One of these objects is the namesake of a plasma current, and is the most
volcanically active body in the solar system. The largest of these objects is unique for having a
magnetosphere, and is named for a figure from Greek myth who is cupbearer to the gods. Galileo
discovered four of these objects: Callisto, Europa, Io, and Ganymede. For 10 points, name these satellites
that orbit the largest planet in the solar system.
ANSWER: moons of Jupiter [prompt on partial answers; accept equivalents]
One of these objects is covered with an ocean whose icy surface is cracked because of massive tides.
Another one of these objects was first passed by Pioneer 10 and 11, and has a sulfur dioxide atmosphere.
Another one of these entities is the largest moon in our solar system. Callisto is one of the Galilean ones,
like Europa, Io and Ganymede. Identify these moons that orbit our solar system's largest planet.
ANSWER: Galilean moons/satellites of Jupiter (accept Galilean moons of Jupiter before read; prompt on moons/satellites in the Solar System before "moon" is read)
Paul Wesson's variant of this theory shows that the soliton solutions of the equation R sub a b equals zero
contains the Robertson-Walker metric; that version called the space-time-matter theory. Randall and
Sundrum developed a variant of it that relies on a bulk that contains two branes separated by sixteen units.
Separating out its equations gives rise to a scalar field called the* radion. It posits a topology of R4 cross
S1, and used a first-order Fourier expansion to characterize a periodic, compact extra dimension. FTP,
name this five-dimensional gravitational theory that attempted to unify electromagnetism and general
relativity, named for its two formulators.
ANSWER: Kaluza-Klein theory (Accept things like "Five dimensional general relativity" or "Five dimensional warped geometry" before *)
He founded the Department of Electrical Engineering at the Chinese University of
Hong Kong. While at Standard Telecommunication Laboratories he worked with
George Hockman and determined that glass fibers were superior to contemporary
mediums. He got the attention of Bell Laboratories when in 1968, along with M. W. Jones he
determined that bulk-fused silica had an intrinsic loss of only 4 decibels per kilometer.
Winner of the 2009 Nobel Prize in Physics this is for ten points what "Father of Fiber Optic
Communications?"
ANSWER: Charles K (C.K.) Kao
In 2002, the E787 project reported the observation of the rare decay of one type of this particle into a pion,
a neutrino, and an anti-neutrino. In addition to baryon number violation and thermal disequilibrium, an
effect discovered using these particles is one of the Sakharov conditions for baryogenesis. Oscillations in
the neutral variety of these particles was investigated by Abraham Pais, who also postulated the new quark
that explained their fast decay rates, and the charged type of this particle turned out to be the solution to the
tau-theta puzzle. They may be more famous for the fact that their neutral variety sometimes decays into two
pions rather than three, leading to the discovery of a non-conserved symmetry. For 10 points, identify these
strange mesons in which Cronin and Fitch discovered CP violation.
ANSWER: kaon [or k meson]
A transformation naemd after this scientist takes harmonic function in Euclidean space to other harmonic
functions and is used to transform sphere interiors to exteriors in potential theory. An instability in which
shear overcomes the effects of stratification is named for this man and Helmholtz, and a viscoelastic
material model is named for this man and Voigt. The statement that the line integral of a velocity field in a
fluid around a contour is constant in time for isentropic flow with no external forces is known as his
namesake circulation theorem. An effect in which gas flowing through a constricted passage is cooled at
constant enthalpy is named for James Joule and this man, who claimed that heat taken from a reservoir
cannot by itself be used to do work, thus providing a formulation of the second law of thermodynamics. For
ten points, identify this British scientist who helped lay the transatlantic cable and names an absolute
temperature scale.
ANSWER: Lord Kelvin [or William Thomson]
Along with a German, this man names a phenomenon caused by a velocity discontinuity across a vortex
sheet. This man's brother James predicted that pressure would lower the melting point of ice. This man
obtained his first patent for the siphon recorder. He also patented the mirror galvanometer around the same
time that he was involved in laying the transatlantic telegraph cable. The triple point of water is used to
define a unit named for this man. For 10 points, name this British scientist who names an absolute
temperature scale and the SI unit of temperature.
ANSWER: Lord Kelvin [or William Thomson; or 1st Baron Kelvin]
This man derived an equation for the propagation of voltage down the trans-Atlantic telegraph cable and
coined the term "kinetic energy." He used the temperature of the sun as the basis for his incorrect
calculation of the age of the Earth, and also claimed that physics prevented heavier-than-air flying
machines. For 10 points, name this man who defined the absolute temperature scale now named after him.
ANSWER: William Thomson, Lord Kelvin [or William Thomson]
A model of viscoelasticity in based on units composed of springs in parallel with frictional viscous dampers
is named after Voigt and this scientist. A theorem named after this scientist states that for any flow governed
by Euler's equation, the time-derivative of the line integral of the velocity field around any closed contour is
zero. One use of that theorem is to analyze the formation of a Karman vortex street at the interface of two
flow layers with different velocities, an instability named for Helmholtz and this scientist. When the
inversion coefficient is negative, the isenthalpic compression of a gas causes it to cool in an effect named
for Joule and this man. For 10 points, identify this British physicist who gives his name to the unit of
absolute temperature.
ANSWER: William Thomson, First Baron Kelvin [accept either; also accept "Voigt" before mention; accept actual descriptions of the theorems/models, e.g. Kelvin-Helmholtz at any time]
In a speech, this physicist called the Michelson-Morley experiment and the ultraviolet catastrophe two
"dark clouds" over science. He designed a mirror galvanometer and mariner's compass. At a suggestion by
Samuel Morse, he worked with Wildman Wildhouse on the transatlantic telegraph cable. For 10 points,
name this physicist who formulated the first and second laws of thermodynamics and theorized absolute
zero, the base of his namesake absolute temperature scale.
ANSWER: William Thomson [or Lord Kelvin]
He is the first namesake of a phenomenon whose onset is classically associated with a Richardson number
of less than one-fourth. He derived a namesake set of equations relating the Seebeck and Peltier
coefficients. He is first namesake of a process in which a star heats and radiates due to gravitational
contraction, a mechanism that led him to claim the Sun was less than a billion years old. He is also first
namesake of the axiom that there cannot be a perfect heat engine. For 10 points, name this man who names
a shearing fluid instability and a contraction with Helmholtz, a statement of the second law of
thermodynamics with Planck, and an absolute temperature scale by himself.
ANSWER: 1st Baron Kelvin or William Thomson
This man lends his name to an equation, which, for a given temperature, relates supersaturation to droplet
radius, in order to determine if that radius is increasing or decreasing. He also lends his name to a class of
long, non-dispersive oceanic waves which flow parallel to a physical boundary in geostrophic balance.
Atmospheric waves, which break due to increasing wind shear across a density interface, are named for
Helmholtz and this man. Along with Joule, he is the namesake of an isenthalpic process, which sees
temperature change in a real gas as pressure decreases. For 10 points, name this physicist, whose bestknown contribution is his namesake absolute temperature scale.
ANSWER: Lord Kelvin [or William Thomson, First Baron Kelvin]
The Weiare-Phelan structure is a solution to this man's namesake problem, which sought to find the most
efficient soap bubble foam. One theorem named for him states that the change in circulation around a closed
curve that moves with the fluid is zero. Following Joule's work on gas expansion, he described the increase
in temperature when a gas is adiabatically forced through a valve, also called a throttling process, which is
named for this man and Joule. For 10 points, name this English scientist, who most famously names a
temperature scale in which 0 corresponds to absolute zero.
ANSWER: William Thompson, Lord Kelvin [accept either underlined answer]
This man invented the current balance and a notable compass for the British Navy. He estimated the
Earth to be at most forty million years old and helped in the design and laying of transatlantic telegraph
cables. This baron co-discovered the effect by which gases grow cooler as they expand; he co-names that
effect with James Joule. He also names a scale in which zero degrees is equal to negative 273 degrees
Celsius. For 10 points, name this Irish scientist who names a temperature scale that includes absolute zero.
ANSWER: Lord Kelvin [or William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin; or William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin]
This person developed a device more complicated than a Wheatstone bridge that is used for measuring
small resistances. The effect named for this person and James Joule [jool] explains the temperature change
of a gas that expands without any heat transfer. He made improvements to the mirror galvanometer [galvah-NOM-ih-ter], which he used on his trans-Atlantic cable. Name this scientist whose work in
thermodynamics led him to create an absolute temperature scale with its zero corresponding to absolute
zero temperature.
ANSWER: 1st Baron Lord Kelvin (or William Thomson)
He published his first scientific paper at the age of 16, in defense of Joseph Fourier, and five years later won
the Smith's Prize after graduating from Cambridge. Much later, near the end of his life, he delivered a
speech in which he described two "dark clouds" over physics, the Michelson-Morely experiment and blackbody radiation, both of which Einstein soon went on to solve. He worked extensively on the tran
transatlantic telegraph cable, serving as a chief scientific advisor and enjoying significant accolades upon
the project's completion. His most important scientific contribution, however, was to the field of
thermodynamics, where he helped develop the modern theory of heat and articulated forms of the first and
second laws of thermodynamics. FTP, name this British physicist who created the absolute scale of
temperature.
ANSWER: William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin
One theorem named after this man states that the change in circulation of an ideal fluid around a
closed curve acted upon by conservative forces is zero. With a German, he names a mechanism of
heat production caused by the gravitational contraction of an astronomical body. This discoverer of
(*) magnetoresistance and Joule both name a method of cooling a gas by causing it to expand. This coiner
of the term "kinetic energy" was the first to find the correct value of absolute zero, setting it as the bottom
of his scale. For ten points, identify this man, after whom the SI unit of temperature is named.
ANSWER: William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin (accept either underlined name)
With Helmholtz, this man names an instability that develops when two layers of air are moving at
different speeds. This man used his mirror galvanometer and siphon recorder to help lay the transatlantic
telegraph cables. With the namesake of an energy unit, he co-names an effect in which the expansion of a
gas without production of work or heat transfer is accompanied by a change in temperature. For 10 points,
identify this namesake of a temperature scale approximately 273 degrees above that of the Celsius scale.
ANSWER: Lord Kelvin [or William Thomson; or Baron Kelvin]
One statement named for this scientist states that the circulation of a velocity field for an inviscid and
incompressible fluid does not change in time. Along with a German, this scientist names a phenomenon in
which adjacent fluid layers are moving at different velocities, producing a shear instability-that phenomenon
is named for this man and Helmholtz. This scientist is the second namesake of an effect in which a gas cools
isenthalpically--that effect is named for him and Joule. Multiplying a Rankine by 5/9 gives a unit named for
this scientist. For 10 points, name this scientist who names a unit of temperature that is zero at absolute zero
and is equal to Celsius plus 273.
ANSWER: Lord Kelvin [or William Thomson]
This man gives his name to right triangles with edges in a geometric progression related by the golden
ratio. During the Thirty Years- War, he served as an advisor and astrologer to General Wallenstein. An
early book of his proposed the orbits of the planets could be drawn on spheres circumscribed about
progressively larger Platonic solids. In addition to Mysterium Cosmographicum, he proposed in
Harmonices Mundi that the cube of an orbit's semi-major axis is always proportional to the square of its
orbit time. FTP, name this German astronomer famous for his three laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
A conjecture named for this scientist states that hexagonal packing is the most efficient way to pack
spheres. This author of Cosmological Mysteries formulated a law that states that the square of a planet's
orbital period is directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit. He also stated that a
line joining the Sun and a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal time and that planets follow an elliptical
orbit. For 10 points, name this student of Tycho Brahe (TIE-coh BRAH-hey) who formulated three laws of
planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
A discredited theory of this man, the first to discuss Olbers- paradox, used nested platonic solids. One
principle named for him contains the proportionality constant 4 pi squared over G M, and relates the
square of a [*] period to the cube of a semi-major axis. Another law of his describes a line between two
bodies that sweeps out equal areas in equal time, and his first law states that the sun is a focus of the
elliptical orbit of any planet. For 10 points, name this German mathematician and astronomer whose laws of
planetary motion came from inspecting Tycho Brahe's work.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This scientist's work on the stellating polyhedra led his name, along with Poinsot, to those shapes. He
published his Cosmographic Mysteries before he discovered that the sun is the focus of an ellipse, and that
the cubes of periods of revolution are equal to the squares of the radii of planetary orbits. The student of
Tycho Brahe, for 10 points, name this scientist with three namesake laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man hypothesized that the six known planets at the time moved around the sun in orbits that
were distinct Platonic solids in his first major work, Mysterium Cosmographicum, and he created a
catalogue of stars and planets called the Rudolphine Tables. This man derived a law stating that the
square of the orbital period of a [*] planet is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis. This man
came to the conclusion that the sun was at the focus of Earth's elliptical orbit by using his mentor Tycho
Brahe's notes. For 10 points, which German astronomer formulated three namesake laws of planetary
motion?
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This scientist discussed the music of the spheres concept in his book Harmonices Mundi. His namesake
conjecture addresses the arrangement of spheres with the highest density. This scientist's best known set of
namesake laws relate the semi-major axis of a planet's orbit to its orbital period and that every planet's orbit
forms an ellipse with the sun at a foci. For 10 points, name this scientist, best known for proposing his
namesake laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man's assistant Jan Brunowski named one of the few Milky Way supernovae after him. He is also
the namesake of a satellite launched in 2009 that has found sixty-one extrasolar planets. This first person to
explain how eyeglasses worked noticed an 8-degree error in data he inherited as court mathematician to
Rudolf II, and concluded that the orbit of Mars could not be a circle. For 10 points, name this successor to
Tycho Brahe (TIE-co BRA-hay) who introduced the notion of elliptical orbits as part of his three laws of
planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man noted that the Platonic solids could be uniquely inscribed in a sphere, and nested them in
his model of the Solar System. This man's Mysterium Cosmographicum was the first published
defense of the heliocentric system. One (*) law formulated by this man relates the square of an object's
orbital period to the cube of its semimajor axis, and he also hypothesized that the sun was one focus of an
ellipse. The second of his namesake laws states that planets orbiting the sun sweep out the same area in the
same amount of time due to the conservation of angular momentum. For ten points, name this German
astronomer and assistant to Tycho Brahe who formulated three laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man's namesake conjecture states pi over the square root of eighteen is the optimal density for sphere
packing. This man's namesake equation states mean anomaly is equal to eccentric anomaly minus the
product of eccentricity and the sine of eccentric anomaly. Laws named for this man include one that is also
known as the law of equal areas, one that states the period squared is proportional to the semi-major axis
cubed, and one that states all planets travel in an ellipse. For 10 points, name this German astronomer who
proposed three laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man served as the imperial mathematician under Matthias and Rudolf II. This man developed a
modification of the Galilean telescope that uses a convex lens as the eyepiece. A supernova viewed in 1604
was described by this man in his De Stella Nova. While working as an assistant to Tycho Brahe, this man
plotted out the orbit of Mars. For 10 points, name this German astronomer who developed the three laws of
planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
An icosahedron can be used as a basis for stellated polyhedra named for Poinsot (pwan-SOH) and
this man. This scientist postulated that the planets were in fact Platonic solids, and one of his (+) laws
relates the square of the period to the cube of the semi-major axis. This man was mentored by (*)
Tycho Brahe (BRAH-hay), and he also stated that the elliptical orbit of the Earth had its focus at the sun.
For 10 points, identify this German astronomer who formulated three laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man discovered that cubic closed packing and hexagonal closed packing arrangements were the
most efficient ways to pack spheres. One law developed by this relates the square of an object's orbital
period to the cube of its semimajor axis. Another law developed by him is based off of the conservation of
angular momentum and typically stated as equal area over equal time. For 10 points, name this developer of
three laws of planetary motion, this first of which states that the planets orbit the sun in an ellipse.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This astronomer described how nesting the Platonic solids within spheres could model the six known
planets of the solar system. This author of Mysterium Cosmographicum argued that, during equal
intervals of time, planets sweep out (*) equal portions of their elliptical orbits. Data collected by Tycho
Brahe was used by, for 10 points, what German astronomer who devised three laws of planetary motion?
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man improved the refracting telescope, which helped his studies. His Mysterium Cosmographicum
advocated a Platonic solid model of the solar system that incorporated Copernicus- heliocentrism. His most
notable achievements came from working with Tyco Brahe (BRA-hay) and his data. For 10 points, name
this German astronomer who posited three laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
This man believed the orbits of the six known planets could be modeled with the five Platonic
solids. While in Prague, he worked under a (+) Danish colleague whose astronomical data he used to
test his theories in Mysterium Cosmographicum. The findings of Tycho Brahe led this man to suggest
that (*) orbits were not circular but elliptical. For 10 points, name this promoter of the Copernican view
who discovered three namesake laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
With Poinsot, this scientist names some stellated polyhedra. This scientist names a conjecture about
the average density of packing spheres. The case featuring the Inverse Square Law is a specialized
form of the two-body problem named for this man. A trajectory taken by a planet that features a
two-dimensional orbital plane is named for this man. He also noted that areas are equivalent when
formed from the sun sweeping out to a planet's orbit in his second law. For ten points, name this formulator
of three laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
The second of these laws can expressed as the derivative with respective to time of the areal velocity is
equal to zero. The third of these laws states that the square of the orbital period is directly proportional to
the cube of the semi-major axis. The second of them, often expressed as "equal area over equal time", is a
direct consequence of the conservation of angular momentum. For 10 points, name this group of three
astronomical laws, the first of which states that the orbit of a planet around the sun takes the form of an
ellipse.
ANSWER: Kepler's laws
One parameter for bodies whose motion is characterized by these statements is the mean anomaly,
which is one of the three angular parameters along with the true anomaly and the eccentric anomaly.
The second of these statements states that areal velocity is constant. The (*) third of them relates the
square of the period to the cube of the semi-major axis, while the first of them states that orbits are ellipses
with the sun at one focus. For 10 points, name these three laws of planetary motion, named for a German
astronomer.
ANSWER: Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
The system described by this set of statements has a conserved quantity called the
Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector. One of these statements holds that a body's areal velocity is constant,
while another relates the square of the sidereal period to the cube of an (*) ellipse's semimajor axis.
Isaac Newton used calculus to rigorously prove these laws, which were based on examinations of data
taken by Tycho Brahe. For 10 points, identify this set of three laws, named for a German astronomer, that
describe how planets move.
ANSWER: Kepler's laws of planetary motion
In polar coordinates, one of these statements says that r equals p over quantity one plus epsilon cosine theta,
where p is the semilatus rectum and epsilon is the eccentricity. Another states that the time derivative of the
areal (AIR-ee-uhl) velocity is zero, or that equal areas are swept out in equal times. The third says that the
square of the period is directly proportional to the cube of the semimajor axis. For 10 points, name these
laws of planetary motion named after a German astronomer and student of Tycho Brahe.
ANSWER: Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
These results can be derived from the fact that their governing force obeys the inverse-square law. One of
them, known as the "law of harmonies," states that the square of the period of an object is proportional to
the cube of the semimajor axis. Another of these laws states that a body will in equal amounts of time
traverse equal areas of the elliptical path guaranteed by the first of these laws. Identify these laws that
govern how objects orbit in a solar system.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler's three laws of planetary motion (or Johannes Kepler's laws)
These statements model figures whose positions are defined by parameters such as the three anomalies and
argument of periapsis. For artificial bodies, the k prime term replaces the k term in one of these statements.
The second one suggests that one half r squared theta, or the areal velocity, is constant, while the last one
utilizes the conservation of angular momentum and the first concludes an elliptical path. The Laws of Areas
and of Periods are included among, for ten points, which set of rules derived by a student of Tycho Brahe
and which govern the behavior of planetary objects.
ANSWER: Kepler's Laws of planetary motion
Newton "corrected" this law by squaring both sides of one form of it, and this law is used to compute
the Gaussian gravitational constant. Joseph Privat de Molieres proved one case of it by showing that if
the normal force and centripetal force are proportional, then one over r squared is proportional to v
squared over r, and since v is proportional to r over t, r cubed is proportional to t squared. For 10
points, name this law, which states that the square of the orbital period of a planet is proportional to
the cube of the semi-major axis of that orbit.
ANSWER: Kepler's Third Law [or harmonic law]
When given an electron density for a 1-electron system, this quantity is described by the von Weizsacker
functional. Two times the average value of this equals a constant times the average of its counterpart by the
virial theorem. One can use the virial theorem to derive the equipartition theorem, which gives that this
quantity is three-halves times the Boltzmann constant times temperature. This quantity is equal to
momentum squared over two times mass. The rotational form of this is equal to one-half times the moment
of inertia times the angular velocity squared. Name this quantity which, in translational motion, equals onehalf times mass times velocity squared.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on "energy;" do not accept "potential energy"]
According to special relativity, this quantity equals mass times the Lorentz factor times the speed of
light squared minus the rest energy. The temperature of a gas is proportional to the (*) average value
of this for its particles. The change in this quantity is the work done on an object, and it is equal to one half
times mass times velocity squared. As an object falls, its potential energy is converted into, for 10 points,
what type of energy related to motion?
ANSWER: kinetic energy (accept KE; prompt on energy)
In the photoelectric effect, the value of this quantity for an ejected electron plus the work function is
equal to Planck's constant times the frequency of the incident light. The change in this quantity is
equal to the area under a force vs. displacement graph. This quantity can be expressed as the (*)
linear momentum squared over twice the mass and is not conserved in inelastic collisions. For 10 points,
identify this quantity classically defined as one-half mass times velocity squared, often contrasted with
potential energy.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on energy, accept translational kinetic energy]
The work function of a metal can be found by taking Planck's constant times frequency for the absorbed
photon and subtracting this quantity for the emitted electron. The equipartition theorem sets it equal to
three-halves times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. Its rotational component is proportional to the
angular velocity squared. It is conserved in elastic, but not inelastic, collisions. Its change is equal to the
work done on the system. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to half of mass times velocity squared,
the energy of motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [or KE; or E sub k]
The ratio of this quantity for a rocket and exhaust steam is different in different reference frames
according to the Oberth effect. This quantity is equal to p squared over 2 m. Escape velocity is
reached when this quantity plus a related gravitational quantity equals zero. This quantity is not
conserved in inelastic collisions, but is conserved in elastic collisions. It is equal to (*) one half m v
squared. For 10 points, identify this form of energy of movement, contrasted with potential energy.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
For a system of n particles, the average value of this quantity equals negative one-half the average
value of a complementary quantity, according to the virial theorem. Relativistically, this quantity
equals mass times the speed of light squared times the Lorentz factor minus one. For an ideal gas, this
quantity equals three-halves times Boltzmann's constant times temperature according to the
equipartition theorem. The (*) rotational version of this quantity equals one-half the moment of inertia
times the square of angular velocity. For translational dynamics, however, it equals "one-half m v squared."
For ten points, name this quantity, the energy of motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
For a gas, this quantity is described as a function of electron density in the von Weizsacker functional. Its
relativistic version is given by quantity gamma minus 1 times mc squared, and it appears as capital T in the
Lagrangian expression where this quantity's counterpart is subtracted from it, while the two are added in the
Hamiltonian. Set equal to the gravitational potential energy to determine escape velocity, for 10 points,
identify this quantity, expressed as one-half moment of inertia times angular velocity squared in rotations
and classically defined as one-half mass times velocity squared for a moving object.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
The operator for this equals negative the quantity Planck's constant squared divided by twice the
mass end quantity times del squared. The Hamiltonian is given by twice this quantity minus the
Langragian, while the Lagrangian is given by this quantity minus U. In relativistic calculations, it is
found by gamma minus one times mc2. For a molecule of a gas, it is equal to three-halves times
Boltzmann's constant times temperature. According to a namesake theorem, work equals the (*)
change in this. This is usually calculated as momentum squared divided by twice the mass, or as one half
mass times speed squared. For 10 points, name this type of energy possessed by objects in motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on partial answer; prompt on "T" or "K"]
For gas molecules, this quantity is related to three-halves times Boltzmann's constant times
temperature, via the equipartition theorem. For electrons in the photoelectric effect, a maximum
value for it is Planck's constant times frequency minus the (*) work function. The rotational type of it is
equal to one-half times moment of inertia times angular velocity, while in any isolated system its change
is equal to the total work. It is given in linear systems as one-half times mass times velocity. For 10
points, identify this type of energy possessed by objects in motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
It is not thrust, but the Oberth effect allows a rocket engine to generate this quantity at higher
speeds. Another quantity is subtracted from this quantity to compute the Lagrangian. Temperature
is proportional to molecules- amount of this quantity, which is not conserved in (*) inelastic collisions.
For 10 points, name this quantity that is equal to one half mass times velocity squared, the energy possessed
by moving objects.
ANSWER: kinetic energy (accept KE; prompt on K; prompt on energy)
Lagrangian mechanics uses a capital T to represent this quantity. In thermodynamics, the average value of
this quantity for gas molecules is three-halves times the Boltzmann constant times the temperature. For
rotating objects, this quantity is one-half times the moment of inertia times the angular speed squared. This
quantity and momentum are conserved in elastic collisions. For rigid objects, this quantity is one-half times
mass times velocity squared. For 10 points, name this type of energy associated with objects in motion that
is often contrasted with potential energy.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on "(internal) energy"; do NOT accept "potential energy"]
In time-of-flight mass spectrometry, this quantity is equalized between each fragment before analysis.
In the Thomas-Fermi type of density functional theories, this quantity is calculated using functionals
of the electron density. The quantum mechanical operator corresponding to this quantity is the
negative h-bar squared over two m times the Laplacian. This quantity is added to (*) V in the
definition of the Hamiltonian, and its average value for particles in a gas is equal to three-haves times
Boltzmann's constant times the temperature. The change in this quantity is equal to the work done
according to one theorem, and when analyzing a falling object it is common to set this equal to the change
in gravitational potential energy. For 10 points, name this quantity which for a classical mass m moving
with velocity v is given by one half m v squared.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [accept T or K throughout]
For gas molecules, this quantity is related to three-halves times Boltzmann's constant times
temperature, via the equipartition theorem. For electrons in the photoelectric effect, a maximum
value for it is Planck's constant times frequency minus the (*) work function. The rotational type of it is
equal to one-half times moment of inertia times angular velocity, while in any isolated system its change
is equal to the total work. It is given in linear systems as one-half times mass times velocity. For 10
points, identify this type of energy possessed by objects in motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
In the photoelectric effect, the maximal value for this quantity is the product of Planck's constant and
frequency, minus the work function. This quantity can be expressed as the square of linear momentum over
two times the mass. The difference in this quantity is canonically said to be equal to work, and its usual
representation is one-half times mass times velocity squared. For 10 points, identify this energy of motion,
which is contrasted with potential energy.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on energy]
Von Weizsacker names a functional for this quantity, whose average value is given by the virial theorem.
Symbolized by a capital T in the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulas, it can be calculated as "p squared
over 2 m." The change in this quantity equals the work done by the net force. It is conserved in elastic, but
not inelastic, collisions. For rotational motion, it equals "one-half I omega squared," while for a non-
rotating object it equals "one-half m v squared." For 10 points, name this type of energy often contrasted
with potential energy.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
Planck's constant times the frequency of a photon is equal to the value of this quantity for electrons
plus the work function, according to the photoelectric effect. For ideal gases, it is equal to three halves
times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. This quantity is not conserved in inelastic collisions,
and can be written as momentum squared over 2 times mass. For 10 points, identify this quantity equal
to one half times mass times velocity squared, which is possessed by an object by virtue of its motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on energy]
The work function of a metal can be found by taking Planck's constant times frequency for the
absorbed photon and subtracting this quantity for the emitted electron. The equipartition theorem
sets it equal to three-halves times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. Its rotational component
is proportional to the (*) angular velocity squared. It is conserved in elastic, but not inelastic, collisions.
Its change is equal to the work done on the system. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to half of mass
times velocity squared, the energy of motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [or KE; or E sub k]
In the Lagrangian, an additive term representing this quantity does not have its sign changed. This value
is equal to three halves temperature times Boltzmann's constant. For an object, the increase in it is equal to
the definite integral of force over time, meaning its change is equal to the work performed on the object. It
is conserved in an elastic collision. It has a rotational form and a translation form, which is equal to one
half mass times velocity squared. For 10 points, name this energy of motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
The operator of this quantity is negative Planck's constant squared over two times the mass del squared. In
the case of a stable gravitational system, its average value over time according to the virial theorem is equal
to negative one half times another quantity. This quantity is represented by a capital T in the formula for the
Hamiltonian. The average value of this quantity per molecule in an ideal gas is three halves kt. It is not
conserved in inelastic collisions due to heat dissipation. For 10 points, name this quantity, whose rotational
form is given by one half times moment of inertia times angular velocity squared, often called energy of
motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [do not accept "energy" or "potential energy"; accept energy of motion before mentioned; prompt on "K"]
In the Thomas-Fermi formalism, the density functional of this quantity is proportional to the integral of the
electron density raised to the five-thirds power. In the one-dimensional free-particle Hamiltonian, the
operator corresponding to this quantity is obtained from its classical analogue by replacing the square of the
momentum with the second spatial derivative. For periodic motion in a gravitationally bound system, the
virial theorem gives this quantity as minus one-half times the potential energy. For an ideal gas particle, it
equals three-halves times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. When the mass is invariant and
conditions are non-relativistic, this quantity is given by one-half times the mass times the velocity squared.
For 10 points, name this quantity, the energy possessed by an object due to its motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on partial answer, i.e. "energy", do not prompt on "potential energy"]
The average value for this quantity can be determined by the virial theorem, and this quantity is lowest
when the center of the mass of a reference frame is stationary. This quantity is equal to a body's momentum
squared divided by twice its mass, and the Lagrangian is calculated as this quantity symbolized T minus a
related quantity. The change in this quantity is equal to the net work done on an object, and its rotational
variety is equal to one-half times the moment of inertia times angular velocity squared. For 10 points, name
this quantity which is equal to one-half times mass times velocity squared, the energy of an object due to its
motion.
ANSWER: Kinetic Energy [prompt on Energy before mention]
This quantity is represented by a capital T in the formula for the Hamiltonian, and its average per molecule
in an ideal gas is 3/2 times kt. Its namesake "operator" in quantum mechanics is equal to momentum
squared divided by twice the mass, and it is not conserved in inelastic collisions. The rotational type of this
quantity is calculated as one-half times the moment of inertia times angular velocity squared. Transferable
to potential energy, for 10 points, identify this quantity which can be calculated non-relativistically as one
half times m-v squared.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [do not prompt or accept "energy"]
In the photoelectric effect, the maximum value of this quantity for the released particles is proportional to
frequency of the incoming particles, provided that the frequency is above the threshold frequency. Usually
symbolized T in the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulas, its average value for a mole of ideal gas is
three-halves the constant R times temperature. Work done by a net force is equal to change in this quantity,
whose rotational form is moment of inertia times angular velocity over two. For 10 points, name this
quantity classically equal to one-half mass times velocity squared, which is measured in joules and
contrasted with potential energy in moving objects.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt "T" until read; prompt "E sub K;" prompt "energy of motion"]
In thermal equilibrium, this quantity for every particle is equal to three halves times Boltzmann's constant
times temperature. In special relativity, this quantity is equal to the gamma factor minus one times mass
times the speed of light squared. Multiplying one-half times the moment of inertia and the square of the
angular velocity gives the rotational form of this quantity. Along with momentum, this quantity is conserved
in elastic collisions, and subtracting potential energy from this quantity gives the Lagrangian of the
system. For 10 points, name this physical quantity that is equal to one half times mass times velocity
squared.
ANSWER: kinetic energy
This quantity can be found via the equation momentum squared divided by two times the mass, and
it is reduced by damping. For rotating objects, it is equal to the one-half the moment of inertia times
the angular velocity squared, and a pendulum reaches its (*) maximum height when this quantity is
zero, or when the potential energy is maximized. Equal to one-half m times v squared, for ten points, name
this amount of energy stored in an object's motion.
ANSWER: Kinetic energy (prompt on energy)
One representation of this quantity is equal to the momentum squared over two times mass, and it is
represented in the Lagrangian with a capital T. The equipartition theorem dictates that for molecules in an
ideal gas, this quantity is equal to three-halves times the Boltzmann constant times temperature. The change
in this quantity is equal to power times time, and inelastic collisions do not conserve this quantity. For 10
points, name this quantity defined as one-half times the mass times velocity squared, the energy possessed
by objects in motion.
ANSWER: Kinetic Energy [prompt on Energy]
For a relativistic particle, this quantity is equal to quantity Lorentz factor minus one, times m c
squared. This quantity is equal to the average of the Hamiltonian and the Lagrangian, the latter of
which is equal to this quantity minus a related one. At slower speeds, it is equal to momentum
squared divided by two times the mass, or one-half (*) mass times velocity-squared. For 10 points,
identify this energy of movement that is contrasted with potential energy.
ANSWER: kinetic energy [prompt on energy]
Stress is given relative to a reference configuration by a tensor named for this man and Piola, and
three equations describing extensive bodies immersed in a fluid are named for him and Clebsch.
This man's theorem gives the number of spanning trees of a graph as one over vertex number times
the product of the nonzero eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix. A hot, dense gas gives a continuous
(*) spectrum according to a set of laws named for this man, formulated from spectroscopy work done with
Robert Bunsen. This scientist's best-known namesake principles follow from conservation of charge and
conservation of energy, and hold that the sum of currents at any node, or the sum of voltages around a
loop, must be zero. For 10 points, name this physicist, the namesake of two circuit laws.
ANSWER: Gustav Kirchhoff
"
Along with Piola, this man names two stress tensors. He theorized that hot gases produce discrete
spectral lines, and that hot solid objects surrounded by cool gases produce spectra with gaps in his
namesake laws of spectroscopy. This man's namesake law of thermal radiation states that at thermal
equilibrium, the emissivity of a surface equals its absorptivity. For 10 points, name this German
physicist who coined the term "black body" and has a namesake "loop rule" and "junction rule" for
circuits.
ANSWER: Gustav Robert Kirchoff
His work with Gabrio Piola created a doubly eponymous stress tensor named for the former and him. The
relationship between different types of spectra are governed by this scientist's namesake three laws of
spectroscopy, and his namesake equations express the motion of an body in an ideal fluid. The developer of
emission spectroscopy and co-discoverer of cesium and rubidium with his partner Robert Bunsen. His most
famous work is particularly useful in mesh analysis and circuit reduction. FTP, name this scientist most
famous for his two namesake laws of circuitry.
ANSWER: Gustav Kirchhoff
A solid, liquid, or dense gas produces a spectrum of all wavelengths according to the first of this
man's Three Laws of Spectroscopy. Those laws were discovered by this man and Robert Bunsen,
with whom he discovered cesium and rubidium. He is best known for two (*) rules, one of which states
that the total potential change over an entire circuit is zero, and the other of which states that the sum of all
currents entering a junction equals the sum of all currents leaving it. For 10 points, name this German
physicist with namesake Loop and Junction Rules.
ANSWER: Gustav Kirchhoff
This scientist developed three laws describing the types of material that produce continuous, emission, or
absorption spectra. One of this man's laws is effectively Faraday's law in the absence of a magnetic field.
This man, who mathematically described why a good absorber is a good emitter, discovered cesium and
rubidium with Robert Bunsen. For 10 points, name this German whose electrical laws state that current
entering a junction equals current leaving, and that voltage drops and increases are conserved in a closed
loop.
ANSWER: Gustav [Robert] Kirchhoff
A generalization of Cayley's theorem named for this man gives the number of nonidentical spanning trees
of a given graph as a cofactor of the admittance matrix . Besides the matrix-tree theorem, he developed a set
of laws governing the continuous spectra of hot solid objects, emission-line spectra of gases, and the
absorption spectra that result when hot objects are viewed through a cooler gas. With Robert Bunsen, he
developed emission spectroscopy and discovered cesium and rubidium, while a set of relations governing
the sum of currents and potentials in various branches of a circuit. For 10 points, name this German
physicist who used conservation of charge and energy to develop his namesake loop and junction rules.
ANSWER: Gustav Robert Kirchoff
This man generalized Cayley's formula into a theorem giving the number of spanning trees in a
graph; that is his matrix tree theorem. A set of laws named for him includes the statement that a gas
at a high temperature and low pressure will emit an emission-line spectrum, and with Piola, he
names a stress tensor. With a colleague, this man discovered (*) cesium and rubidium; that colleague
was Robert Bunsen. One of this man's rules states that the potential differences across all elements around
any closed circuit loop must be zero. For 10 points, identify this German physicist who coined the term
"black body radiation" and names two circuit rules.
ANSWER: Gustav Kirchhoff
Winner of the 1862 Rumford Medal for his research into the fixed lines of the solar spectrum among other
things, one of his namesake laws states that a hot solid object produces light with a continuous spectrum.
Codiscovering cesium and rubidium with his partner Robert Bunsen, is for 10 points, what German
physicist who coined the term "black body" radiation in 1862, developed three laws of spectroscopy, and
two circuit laws, commonly known as the junction rule and the loop rule?
ANSWER: Gustav Kirchhoff
This scientist developed three laws describing the types of material that produce continuous, emission, or
absorption spectra. One of this man's laws is effectively Faraday's law in the absence of a magnetic field.
This man, who mathematically described why a good absorber is a good emitter, discovered cesium and
rubidium with Robert Bunsen. For 10 points, name this German whose electrical laws state that current
entering a junction equals current leaving, and that voltage drops and increases are conserved in a closed
loop.
ANSWER: Gustav [Robert] Kirchhoff
This scientist's namesake equations relate the velocity, angular velocity, and the time-derivative of coenergy to force and moment for rigid objects in inviscid fluids. One of his theories states that at equilibrium,
the wavelength-averaged emissivity and reflectivity sum to one; that is this physicist's eponymous law of
radiation. He worked with Robert Bunsen to discover rubidium and cesium, and also coined the term "black
body". A set of laws named for this scientist can be derived from the laws of conservation of charge and
energy, and state that the current going into a junction equals the current going out of the junction, as well
as that the voltage around a closed loop is zero. Identify this German physicist, the namesake of two laws
about electrical circuits-the junction and loop rules.
ANSWER: Gustav Robert Kirchhoff
This man was a longtime collaborator with Robert Bunsen, with whom he co-discovered cesium and
rubidium (roo-BIH-dee-um). He described the spectrum that is emitted from a hot solid object and from a
hot gaseous object in his three laws of spectroscopy (spek-TRAW-skuh-pee). Another set of laws named
for him describe the sum of potential differences and the sum of currents in an electrical circuit. Those are
known as his loop and point rules. For 10 points, name this German scientist whose circuit laws describe
conservation of charge.
ANSWER: Gustav Kirchoff
One statement named for this man says that the derivative of enthalpy with respect to temperature equals the
change in heat capacity of a reaction. A set of laws named for this scientist divides spectroscopic spectrums
into continuous, emission-line, or absorption-line based on the material. A black body's emissivity equals
its absorptivity according to another statement named for him. One law named for this man says that the
sum of currents entering a node must equal the sum of currents exiting that node. Another law named for
him says that the sum of voltage changes in a closed circuit must equal zero. For 10 points, identify this
physicist who has junction and loop rules.
ANSWER: Gustav Robert Kirchhoff
With Piola, this man names a stress tensor that, unlike the Cauchy stress tensor, defines stress relative to a
reference state, rather than to the present state. Building on the experimental work of Fraunhofer, this man
showed that hot solids produce continuous spectra, while hot gases produce discrete emission spectra. That
work was done partly with Bunsen. This man's second law applies to closed meshes. His first law is a
statement of the conservation of charge. For 10 points, name this German physicist who developed two
rules for analyzing circuits, his eponymous node and loop rules.
ANSWER: Gustav Kirchhoff
The libration theory of the formation of these claims that oscillations increase at certain points, while the
most commonly accepted theory for their formation is based on Wisdom's calculations. Paradoxically, the
same mechanism that appears to explain their existence gives rise to the position of the Plutinos and
Twotinos in the Kuiper belt, as well as the Hilda family and 279 Thule. Recently found to contain some
high-eccentricity objects such as the Griqua and Alinda familises, they occur prominently at 2.95, 2.82 and
2.5 AU, distances which correspond to 7:3, 5:2 and 3:1 resonances with Jupiter, respectively. For 10 points,
name these regions of the asteroid belt, which are nearly devoid of asteroids.
ANSWER: Kirkwood gaps
Alastair Cameron was one of the first to postulate the existence of this region, and a notable object
here was discovered by Charles Kowal. Emission spectra of objects here have strong methane peaks,
and objects not found at its edges are termed (*) "cubewanos". Chiron, Pholus, and other objects known
as the "centaurs" are believed to originate in this region. Objects in this region include Haumea, Varuna,
Sedna, and an object formerly known as Xena, now called Eris, whose discovery sparked some of the
objects in this region to be re-classified as dwarf planets. For ten points, name this region of icy objects
beyond the orbit of Neptune, named for Edgeworth and a Dutch astronomer.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt
Scott Tremaine named this entity from the opening line of the paper by Julio Fernandez that
proposed its existence. Classical objects in its interior are called cubewanos, and its boundaries are
defined by the one to two and two to three resonances with a nearby massive object. Centaurs may be
in the middle of a transition from this location to the (*) Jupiter family. Unlike the "scattered disk"
objects, the objects found here are unaffected by Neptune's orbit. Objects within this region include
Haumea, Makemake, and Pluto. For 10 points, name this ring of small bodies from around thirty to fiftyfive AUs from the sun.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper belt
Objects with a one-to-two resonance are found beyond this region's namesake cliff. Objects found in this
region include Orcus and Varuna. Objects with circular objects such as Chaos and Quaoar, known as
cubewanos, are not in resonance with the planet that this region lies beyond. A group of objects including
pholus and nessus, known as the centaurs, originate here. Plutinos found here are in a two-to-three
resonance with Neptune. It is located between thirty and fifty astronomical units from the Sun. Sedna can be
found between this region and the Oort cloud. For 10 points, identify this source of many short-period
comets, an eponymous astronomic "belt."
ANSWER: Kuiper Belt
Objects in this region with roughly circular orbits whose plane is approximately that of the ecliptic are
called "cubewanos," and their distribution follows an inverse quartic relationship with distance. The area at
the 1:2 orbital resonance is known as its namesake "cliff" and occurs at about 50 AU, while TL66 was the
first "scattered" object found in it. It is the region where Varuna, Eris, and Charon are found, and it was
thought to be the area where short-period comets originate. For 10 points, name this area which lies beyond
Neptune's orbit, and is named for a Dutch-American scientist.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper belt
The namesake cliff of this object occurs at the location of 1:2 resonance. First theorized by Frederick
Leonard, the improved accuracy of charge-coupled devices was key to its discovery by David Jewitt and
Jane Luu. The "classical" objects of this location are referred to as cubewanos, while the farthest ones from
the Earth are twotinos. The potential dwarf planet named for the creator god of the Tongva people, Quaoar,
is in this region. The Centaurs are minor planets that lie inside it, and Nereid, Phoebe, and Triton are
thought to have their origin here. Sometimes named for Kenneth Edgeworth, for 10 points, name this origin
of short-term comets nearer than the Oort Cloud.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt
Among the objects found in this region are Makemake (MAH-kay-MAH-kay) and Haumea
(hoo-MAY-ah). Also found in this region are a group of "classical" objects called cubewanos
(cue-bee-WAH-nose). This region is sometimes named after Kenneth Edgeworth and is believed to be the
origin of Centaur objects like Chiron. Because of orbital resonance, it has a gap from 40 to 42 AU. The
moon Triton is thought to have been captured by this region, due to its similarities with Pluto, the largest
object in this region. Home to several trans-Neptunian objects, for 10 points, name this region of the solar
system found between the Oort Cloud and Neptune.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt
Its existence was first hypothesized by Frederick Leonard, although it was instead named for people who
later proposed it. Hypothesized causes of its same-named "cliff" around the 1:2 resonance of the nearest
planet include the lack of sufficient debris and the existence of another large object. The number of objects
discovered in this region is now over a thousand, although there are over 70,000 objects estimated to exist
in it, including Haumea and Makemake. New Horizons was sent to observe its second largest object. For 10
points, name this region of the solar system located from 30 AU to about 55 AU from the Sun, which
contains dwarf planets like Pluto and comets.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt
This region's namesake cliff occurs at the 1:2 resonance edge. Twotinos (too-TEE-nohs) and cubewanos
cube-WAH-nohs), of which Makemake (MAH-kay-MAH-kay) is the largest, are located in this region.
Triton may have been captured from this region. The scattered disc intersects this toroid region. The moons
Dysnomia and Charon, and their corresponding planets Eris and Pluto are also located here. For 10 points,
name this region of the solar system beyond Neptune that is the origin of many short-period comets.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt
The namesake cliff in this region marks the point at which a large empty gap begins, and one class of
objects found here, including Quaoar and Varuna, is known as the cubewanos. What is often called its
largest object may actually lie in the Scattered Disk, while its second largest object is set to be explored by
New Horizons. Generally considered the outer remnant of the proto-planetary disk, it is thought to be the
source of objects such as Pholus and Chariklo, known as the centaurs, as well as short-period comets. For
10 points, name this ring of small objects that is home to Eris and Pluto, found beyond the orbit of Neptune.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper belt [or Edgeworth-Kuiper disk]
The objects in this region are classified by their resonance. Objects exhibiting 1:2 resonance are sometimes
called twotinos while those with 2:3 resonance are referred to as Plutinos. This resonance corresponds with
the end of the region at approximately 50 Astronomical Units. The objects in this area are composed of
frozen hydrocarbons, and it has been suggested that Triton, Neptune's largest moon, could be an object
captured from it. FTP, identify this region beyond Neptune that is home to Makemake, Haumea, and Pluto.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt
This region is home to objects with a 1:2 resonance in its namesake cliff, where density drops
dramatically. Those objects in this region are called called twotinos. The classical types of objects in
this area are called cubewanos. 2060 Chiron is located in this region, along with many other [*]
centaurs, and this region, along with the Oort Cloud and Scattered Disk region, is home to the transNeptunian objects. Home to Quaor, Sedna, and Eris, for 10 points, name this region at the edge of the solar
system, where short-period comets were first thought to originate, named after a Dutch-American
astronomer.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper belt
The purported largest object in this region may actually lie in the Scattered Disc with which it shares a
toroid area. This region has a namesake cliff at its 1:2 resonance, and certain objects in this region that are
not resonant are called cubewanos. The New Horizons mission is set to explore part of this region, which
includes objects with too low a density to become planets. It was described in 1943 by a man who
sometimes names it, Kenneth Edgeworth, and its occupants include the Centaurs, Pluto, and Eris. For 10
points, name this region home to short-period comets and trans-Neptunian objects, forming its namesake
"belt."
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper belt
This region has an inverse quartic brightness slope, and at a one-to-two resonance, it has a namesake "cliff."
Divided into cold and hot populations, this region is home to Weywot and Quaoar. It is thought to be the
source of centaurs and its outer edge overlaps with the scattered disc. Varuna, Haumea, Sedna, and other
cubewanos lie in this region, which is also the source of short-period comets. It lies much closer to the sun
than the Oort cloud, and is home to trans-Neptunian objects like Pluto. For 10 points, name this belt-shaped
region at the edge of the solar system.
ANSWER: Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt
With D-Alembert, this scientist names a principle that equates the sum of the total internal and
external work along any virtual displacement to zero. He used that principle, which is not restricted
to holonomic constraints, to derive equations named after Euler and this scientist without using
Hamilton's principle. Those equations equate the position derivative of this scientist's namesake (*)
function to the time derivative of the velocity derivative of that namesake function. The calculus of
variations is based on that equation, which uses this man's namesake function, which is the difference
between kinetic and potential energy. This scientist also names a method for finding the extrema of a
constrained function. For 10 points, name this scientist with some namesake multipliers.
ANSWER: Joseph-Louis Lagrange [accept Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia]
The quantity named after this person obeys the equation that its derivative with respect to time of its
derivative with respect to velocity equals its derivative with respect to position. In Newtonian mechanics,
that quantity equals kinetic energy minus potential energy. Like William Hamilton, this scientist developed
a system of mechanics based on the Principle of Least Action. Identify this scientist whose attempt to solve
the three-body problem led to his name being used to name the positions in orbital motion where a small
object can be held still by the orbits of larger objects.
ANSWER: Joseph-Louis Lagrange
In general relativity, a quantity named for this man is proportional to the square root of the negative of the
metric tensor. More generally, the derivative of that quantity with respect to a generalized coordinate
appears in an equation named for this man and Euler. In a method named for this man, one sets the
gradients of a function and a constraint proportional to one another. In addition to that method of
multipliers, he names a set of five points at which a small object orbits in sync with two larger objects, as
well as a quantity equal to kinetic energy minus potential energy. For 10 points, name this French scientist
who developed a namesake form of mechanics.
ANSWER: Joseph-Louis Lagrange
The derivative of this man's namesake operator with respect to position is equal to the derivative of that
operator with respect to momentum in turn differentiated with respect to time, according to an equation
from variational calculus. Kordylewski clouds may be present at some regions named for him, which are
solutions to the restricted three-body problem. His namesake operator is equal to the kinetic energy minus
the potential energy of a system. He also developed a method in which extreme values of a function under
certain constraints are found using his namesake multipliers. For 10 points, identify this mathematician,
whose multipliers are used in optimization problems.
ANSWER: Joseph-Louis Lagrange [or Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia]
One of these entities may contain Kordylewski clouds, while another one of them contains objects called the
Greek Camp. The namesake of these objects predicted their existence while considering a restricted case of
a problem solved in general by Sundman. Three of them are unstable, but the other two can be stable given
a sufficiently high mass ratio. These components of the circular restricted three-body problem solution
contain the Trojans Asteroids and at these locations the net gravitational pull is precisely equal to the
centripetal force necessary to maintain a common orbit. For 10 points, name these positions where an object
will remain motionless with respect to the orbit of two larger bodies, named for a French-Italian creator of
the calculus of variations and a namesake multiplier.
ANSWER: Lagrange points [or Lagrangian Points or libration point or L-point; prompt on L1, L2, L3, L4, L5 and Earth-Moon L3 or any similar term which specifies astronomical bodies.]
The two Roche lobes of a binary system meet at one of these, and halo orbits can be established around the
less stable ones. Despite being at local maxima of the potential, the Coriolis force keeps the fourth and fifth
ones relatively stable provided that the largest mass is at 24.96 times greater than the second largest. A
restricted form of the three body problem, they are often used for observatory telescopes, and Trojan
asteroids orbit these points for Jupiter. For 10 points, identify these equilibrium locations where an object
can stay stationary relative to larger objects.
ANSWER: Lagrange point [accept Lagrangian point]
Degrees of freedom on which this object is not explicitly dependent are known as cyclic coordinates and
correspond to conservation of conjugate momenta. The Euler equations of systems are in general relations
of derivatives of this mathematical object because they are derived by extremizing the time integral of this
function. This quantity is dependent in general on a system's set of generalized coordinates and speeds, so it
can be seen to be the momentum-to-speed Legendre transform of a similar function. This function is
heuristically equal to the difference between the kinetic and potential energies of a system. For 10 points,
name this function central to a formulation of mechanics complementary to the Newtonian and Hamiltonian
formulations.
ANSWER: the Lagrangian [or Lagrange function; prompt on L]
The breaking of the conformal symmetry of this quantity in the chiral limit in QCD gives rise to
asymptotic freedom. Within a gauge theory, this quantity is invariant under local transformations, and the
invariance of this quantity with respect to time gives rise to the conservation of energy by Noether's
theorem. The derivative of this quantity with respect to a generalized coordinate is equal to the time
derivative of the derivative of this quantity with respect to the time derivative of the generalized coordinate.
The integral of this quantity gives the action and its Legendre transform gives the Hamiltonian. For 10
points, name this quantity equal to the kinetic energy minus the potential energy.
ANSWER: Lagrangian
One benefit to using this value to describe a system is the ability to use any generalized set of coordinates. If
this value is originally invariant under symmetry, then the resulting equations will be as well, which is
useful when testing to see if a physical model is consistent with special and general relativity. When this
value fails to be applicable, such as when observing a dissipative system, then conserved quantities do not
necessarily correspond to any particular symmetries. Equations of motion can be derived from this value if
the initial and end states of a system are known through the use of the Hamiltonian principle. FTP, what is
this value, the time derivative of the action of a physical system, which is defined as the difference between
the kinetic and potential energies of a system?
ANSWER: Lagrangian
In QCD, the density of this function is locally invariant under the BRST transformation and includes
a Faddeev-Popov ghost term. With no matter present, this for gravity is equal to the negative one
over 16 pi Big G times the sum of the Ricci tensor and two times the cosmological constant times the
the square root of the negative determinant of the metric tensor. That formulation and its integral is
named for Einstein and Hilbert. The partial derivative of this function divided by the partial
derivative of the generalized velocity is equal to the generalized (*) momentum, while its namesake's
equation relates its partial derivative to to the derivatives of the generalized momentum and position. The
integral of this function over time is the action. For 10 points, name this function which is the kinetic
energy minus the potential energy, unlike the Hamiltonian, and is symbolized L.
ANSWER: Lagrangian [prompt on "L" before mentioned]
Missions to these locations used to use halo orbits, but now the quasi-periodic Lissajous orbits are
more common. Another orbit around these locations, similar to but smaller than the horseshoe orbit,
is the tadpole orbit. Since one of these locations is at the tip of the (*) Roche lobe, mass transfer in
binary systems occurs through them. The giant impact hypothesis posits that a body formed at one of these
places before crashing into Earth. The first asteroids discovered at these places were the Trojans, in the
Sun-Jupiter system. For 10 points, name these five points where an object with negligible mass can remain
stationary relative to two other bodies.
ANSWER: Lagrangian points [or Lagrange points; or libration points]
It results from the quantum electrodynamic requirement of an absence of vacuum polarization near a
hydrogen atom nucleus, and it receives contributions from both the electron mass renormalization and the
anomalous magnetic moment. It is an exception to the quantum theory proposed by Dirac and Schrodinger,
which holds that states with the same n and j quantum number should be degenerate. It is caused because,
when the electromagnetic force is viewed as an exchange force, an electron can interact with itself,
smearing itself out over a range of 0.1 fermi. This smear causes the electron spin g-factor to deviate from 2,
weakening the electrostatic force between the electron and the nucleus. For 10 points, what is this effect that
results in a 2s electron being slightly higher in energy than the 2p electron?
ANSWER: Lamb shift
This Greek letter names a family of baryons that have an up, down, and another quark. The
"superscript 0" form of that family of particles had an unexpectedly long lifetime, which led to the
discovery of strangeness. This Greek letter names a theory that at its simplest involves six
parameters, including the scalar spectral index, and is based on the FLRW solution of Einstein's field
equations. That theory models the (*) expansion of the universe and is generally considered the standard
model of Big Bang cosmology. This Greek letter names that model, which features cold dark matter, and it
also denotes the cosmological constant. It often denotes charge density for a line of charge. Lagrange
multipliers are denoted by, for 10 points, what Greek letter that also denotes the eigenvalues of a matrix?
ANSWER: lambda
This man names the quantum equivalent of the Lorenz gauge, in which the gauge-breaking
parameter tends to zero, and he derived the expression for the diamagnetism of a free-electron gas.
The quantized cyclotron orbits of a charged particle in a magnetic field are named for him. After his
death Pitaevskii replaced him as an author of the 10-volume Course In Theoretical Physics. Another
theory named for him sets the free energy as a Taylor expansion of the (*) order parameter, and
describes second-order phase transitions. Gilbert modified one equation named for him to describe the
precession of magnetization, and this man won a Nobel prize for a theory that described the superfluidity of
Helium II. For 10 points, name this man who names a formula for the time evolution of magnetization of a
solid with Lifshitz and a phenomenological theory of superfluidity with Ginzburg.
ANSWER: Lev Davidovich Landau
One theory due to this person explains a characteristic minus-five-thirds wave number energy
spectrum by positing the accumulation of Fourier modes in turbulent flows. This scientist's name is
on that theory along with that of the man who discovered the phase space structures that explain it,
which are bifrucations corresponding to period doubling. This physicist discovered that, at a value of
the renormalized rest energy times e to the six pi squared over flavor number times renormalized
coupling constant squared, the (*) coupling constant for an interaction becomes singular. This man's work
with liquid helium II earned him a Nobel for his research into superfluidity, and he lends his name to the
slowing of Langmuir waves over time in a plasma, his namesake "damping." FTP, name this physicist who
minimized the superconductor free energy in an order parameter to obtain a phenomenological theory of
superconductivity named for him and Ginzberg.
ANSWER: Lev Davidovich Landau
This man devised the infamous Theoretical Minimum entrance exam, which only 43 students in his
time were able to pass. He created a list ranking scientists according to productivity from 0 to 5 on a
logarithmic scale, awarding only Einstein the highest score of 0.5. This scientist was renowned for
"trivializing things" in his lecture style by explaining complex natural laws with simple language.
Though he was incarcerated for a year on suspicion of being a (*) German spy, this scientist led a team
supporting the Soviet atomic program. He wrote the ten-volume Course in Theoretical Physics with his
frequent collaborator Evgeny Lifschitz. For 10 points, name this Soviet theoretical physicist who won the
Nobel Prize for Physics for his theory of superfluidity.
ANSWER: Lev Davidovich Landau
Bauer and Donnelly wrote about the interactions of one of this man's proposed particles, whose magnetic
varieties are called magnons. He formulated an early theory of turbulence together with Hopf. Together
with Lifshitz and Gilbert he lends his name to an equation describing the precession of magnetization, while
his namesake quantized levels describes the cyclotron orbits of charged particles in magnetic fields. This
man also proposed the existence of rotons to explain excitations in a certain type of material. The ColemanWeinberg model is a four-dimensional generalization of one theory named for this man, which is based on
this man's theory of second-order phase transitions and is also named for Ginzburg. FTP, name this Soviet
physicist whose work on superfluidity earned him the 1962 Physics Nobel.
ANSWER: Lev Landau
One model developed by this man gives the probability of a transition between a two-level quantum
mechanical system in terms of the diabatic coupling constants. Another behavior named for him occurs
when electrons traveling at speeds approximately equal to the phase speed of a wave do not participate in
resonant interactions with the wave; that phenomenon thus allows for collisionless decay of plasma waves,
which is called his namesake "damping." He names a value at which the coupling constant of a quantum
field interaction blows up, and his experiments on liquid helium led to a phenomenological theory of
superfluidity. For 10 points, identify this physicist, who developed a theory of superconductivity with Vitaly
Ginzburg.
ANSWER: Lev Davidovich Landau [accept Clarence Zener until first sentence]
He originally ranked himself a 2.5, but he later promoted himself to a 2. Born in Baku in 1908, he was
recognized as a child prodigy, entering university at age 14 and receiving his doctorate in theoretical
physics from Leningrad State University at 21. He moved to Copenhagen to study under Niels Bohr, but he
returned to the Soviet Union where he was arrested in one of Stalin's purges. He was only released after his
friend Pyotr Kapitsa, an experimental low temperature physicist, swore that only he could solve a problem
about liquid helium. For ten points, name this physicist, who received the Nobel Prize in 1962 for his
theory of superfluidity.
ANSWER: Lev Landau
This scientist developed a theory of interacting particles which imagines that the excited states of the
interacting particles correspond to the excited states. That theory allows the use of adiabatically
switched on quasiparticles with mean field theory derived energies to represent the interaction. In
addition to that Fermi liquid theory, this scientist has a namesake free energy that is a power series of
the order parameter and that is minimized with respect to that order parameter. In addition to that
theory of second-order (*) phase transitions, this man was the first to develop a theory that explained why
helium-4 had 0 viscosity at low enough temperature. From that theory, with Ginzburg, he developed a
theory of superconductivity. For 10 points, name this Russian scientist who developed a theory of
superfluidity.
ANSWER: Lev Landau
One equation named for this man, another physicist, and Gilbert gives the precessional motion of
magnetization in a solid, while with Zener (*) he names an equation that gives the transition dynamics of a
two-state quantum system. With Pomeranchuk and Migdal, he names an effect that results in the reduction
of the pair production cross section at high matter density. He names the value at which the coupling
constant of a field theory becomes infinity, his namesake pole. In addition to that equation named for him
and Lifshitz, he's probably most famous for his theory, generalized by Coleman and Weinberg, which
describes second order phase transitions. FTP, name this physicist who names a phenomenological theory
of superconductivity with Ginzburg, a 1962 Nobel prizewinner.
ANSWER: Lev Davidovitch Landau (Accept "Lifshitz" until *)
One component of this device is tagged with the descriptor "beauty" and utilizes a very narrow
forward angular coverage. Another part of this device uses a two-level trigger system to decrease the
amount of data it processes. This device suffered a quench shortly after its debut, which damaged the
niobium-titanium superconducting magnets needed to create its (*) 8-tesla fields. A test of SUSY
involving B-meson decay modes was conducted using this device. Its components include ATLAS and
CMS, each of which has individually observed evidence of a particle with a mass of about 126 GeV that is
believed to mediate the acquisition of mass. For 10 points, name this particle accelerator located at CERN,
which was originally built to detect the Higgs boson.
ANSWER: Large Hadron Collider [or LHC]
A proposed upgrade to it hopes to increase luminosity, known as the "super" version of it. One part of it is
partially known as "beauty" and uses the VELO to carry out B tagging. Another part of it uses what are
known as electromagnetic calorimeters and contains a large central magnetic solenoid. Specialized
experiments, like ATLAS and Totem, are contained in a total of 6 detectors seen in this device. FTP, an
attempt to discover the Higgs boson is the main purpose of this CERN particle accelerator, located partly in
Switzerland and France that was the subject of end-of-the-world theories in late 2008.
ANSWER: Large Hadron Collider
Over the last two weeks one of its Twitter pages have included updates from April 21 announcing that an
analysis summary of "X(3872) and psi(2S) production in pp collisions at sqrt(s) = 7 TeV" is available, and
another from the week earlier announcing that the summary of "Observation of W arrow tau nu" is likewise
available. A long shutdown of it is set for 2013 to prepare for higher-energy running in the following year.
Built to discover things like superpartners, it successfully fired the first protons around the tunnel in 2008.
For 10 points identify this particle accelerator located near the border of France in Switzerland
ANSWER: Large Hadron Collider or LHC
SixTrack and Test4Theory are components of a distributed computing application put out by this facility.
One experiment conducted here is headed by Pinfold and is called MoEDAL. ATLAS and CMS are among
the detectors located here. Part of the purpose of this facility is to investigate supersymmetry, and an event
of five-sigma significance at 126 giga-electron-volts in this facility is thought to be confirmation of the
existence of the final object predicted by the standard model. For 10 points, name this facility at which the
Higgs Boson was discovered in July 2012.
ANSWER: Large Hadron Collider [or LHC; prompt on CERN or European Organization for Nuclea Research]
This device's data output, measured in inverse femtobarns, exceeds any other device of its kind. It's not
RHIC, but one substance created by this device is described by QCD at high temperature and density. The
final injector for this device is the SPS. This device is believed capable of detecting particles such as
neutralinos, which arise in supersymmetric theories. A toroidal apparatus in this device is being used to
search for the last unknown Standard Model particle, which gives mass to all the other particles. For 10
points, name this particle accelerator in Switzerland and France built by CERN, which is looking for,
among other things, the Higgs boson.
ANSWER: Large Hadron Collider [or LHC]
In the night sky, this galaxy is located between the Dorado and Mensa constellations, and this is the location
of a large supernova which was detected on Earth in 1987. This contains the most active starburst region in
the Local Group, the Tarantula Nebula. Until the discoveries of Sagittarius Dwarf and Canis Major Dwarf,
this was thought to be the closest galaxy to the Milky Way. Name this galaxy about twice the size of another
galaxy it is closely associated with.
ANSWER: Large Magellanic Cloud or LMC
One of the terms of the Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi equation deals with Fermi-Walker transport while the
other term deals with this phenomenon. Various techniques based on this concept include the neutronresonance spin-echo technique and the spin-echo small-angle neutron scattering technique. Griffiths and
Zavoiskij experimentally verified the existence of its ferromagnetic resonance which was predicted by
Lifshitz and Landau. The angular velocity of this process is proportional to the magnetic field by the
negative of the gyromagnetic ratio. This is, for 10 points, the precession of magnetic moments of atoms,
electrons, and nuclei about a magnetic field, named for an Irish physicist?
ANSWER: Larmor precession
The output of these objects is a solution to the paraxial form of the Helmholtz equation, and so can be
modeled as a Gaussian beam. Einstein's A and B coefficients determine the efficiency of these devices.
This device was preceded by a similar one using NH3 created by Gordon, Zeiger, and Townes. One
technique used in these devices delays oscillation by modifying the (*) Q factor of the resonating cavity.
A popular gas version of this device excites helium to a metastable state, which then transfer energy to neon
to form an inverted population. The first one of these devices was created by Theodore H. Maiman using a
ruby crystal. For 10 points, name this device that transforms various forms of energy into electromagnetic
radiation.
ANSWER: lasers [or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation]
Scientists in Innsbruck are using these objects to manipulate highly cooled calcium atoms to simulate a wide
variety of phenomena, and scientists in Geneva are using these to control rain. These objects put more
particles into excited states than ground states, which is known as population inversion, by pumping energy
into a gain medium. These devices generally contain an output coupler at one end of an optical resonator,
allowing a beam of photons to pass out of them. Name these items that produce a stimulated emission of
radiation.
ANSWER: lasers
For these devices to work, the number of atoms in an excited state must be greater than the number
of atoms in the ground state, a condition known as population inversion. The Doppler effect allows
them slow down atoms in their namesake "cooling" effect, and six of them can be used to form
"optical molasses". One common type uses a mixture of (*) helium and neon gas. Unlike incandescent
light bulbs, these devices produce coherent light of a specific frequency. Their operation can be described
as either continuous or pulsed. For 10 points, name these devices that produced light amplified by the
stimulated emission of radiation.
ANSWER: Lasers
The technique of Q-switching can be used to produce a pulsed one of these devices, first demonstrated with
a ruby crystal. A necessary condition for these devices to work is that they have a majority of particles in
the excited state, a phenomenon known as population inversion. Steven Chu won the Nobel Prize in Physics
for using these devices to cool Bose-Einstein Condensates. The operation of one of these devices involves
the falling of electrons from metastable states within a mirrored cavity, eventually resulting in the emission
of light of a single wavelength. For 10 points, coherent light is emitted from what device related to the
MASER?
ANSWER: lasers
In mass spectrometry, the first step of the MALDI technique uses one of these devices for desorption.
Steven Chu won the 1997 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work in using these devices to cool and trap atoms,
and these decides are used to produce a coherent and monochromatic beam of light. For 10 points, identify
these devices which produce high-intensity radiation via the amplification light, sometimes used in
presentations to "point" to items on a screen.
ANSWER: lasers [or Light Amplification through Stimulated Emission of Radiation]
Some of these devices use exciplexes [EKS-ih-pleks-es], which are sometimes referred to as excited
dimers [DY-mers], or excimers [EKS-ih-mers]. Those substances disintegrate when they are in the
ground state, which means that a majority of them are in the excited state, a condition known as
population inversion. That population inversion takes place within the gain medium of these devices,
which is typically placed in an optical cavity. Early versions of these devices were monochromatic,
and all of them produce an output that is very coherent. Name these devices capable of producing a
very focused beam of light that can be used to read barcodes or DVDs.
ANSWER: lasers
The active medium of the quantum cascade type of this device is a semiconductor, and the excimer type
uses noble gases. Q-switching in these devices can cause intense bursts of output. These devices were used
by Steven Chu to cool and trap atoms, and they were first created by Theodore Maiman using a ruby rod.
These devices rely on more atoms existing in the higher energy state than the lower energy state, known as
population inversion. For 10 points, name this device whose name is an acronym of light amplification by
stimulated emission of radiation.
ANSWER: lasers [or Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation]
The NIF uses these in an attempt to generate fusion and one technique involving these is
q-switching. An important process in their function is population inversion, and their operation
involves pumping. Types include the free electron variety, and solid state ones can use ruby as a
medium. They produce (*) coherent light and a simple design uses two mirrors, one partially reflective.
For 10 points, identify these that amplify light by stimulated emission of radiation.
ANSWER: laser [or light amplified by stimulated emission of radiation before "amplify"]
These devices can be modified to produce a pulsed output by varying the Q-factor in the resonator. These
devices require a gain medium to add energy to the output. In these devices, pumping is used to convert the
majority of the atoms to an excited state to combat the effects of absorption - that state is called population
inversion. The basic premise of these devices is that a photon interacts with an electron in an excited state to
knock it down to the ground state, producing two photons, causing a cascade that generates a large number
of photons of the same wavelength. For 10 points, name these devices that use stimulated emission to emit
amplified light.
ANSWER: lasers [the acronym is "light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation"]
One material commonly used in these devices is yttrium (YE-tree-um) aluminum garnet doped with
neodymium (NEO-dim-ee-um). These devices can shorten their output by mode-locking. These devices are
used to perform Doppler cooling, which was used to create the first Bose-Einstein condensate. They consist
of a pair of mirrors bookending a gain medium, which undergoes population inversion to emit photons of a
single wavelength. These devices are used to read CDs in CD players. For 10 points, name these devices
that emit a coherent beam of visible electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: LASER [or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation]
The rate at which one process occurs in these devices is proportional to Einstein's B-coefficient, and
mode-locking can make them active for shorter periods of time. These devices typically require the
gain medium to reach a state of population inversion, where there are more molecules in an (*)
excited state than not. In 1960, Theodore Maiman used a ruby crystal in one of these devices not long after
Charles Townes created a precursor to one of these objects that produced microwaves. For ten points,
identify these devices that emit a very focused beam of light.
ANSWER: lasers (prompt on masers, accept light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation)
These devices are the only suitable source for Raman spectroscopy. They can come in four- level
and three-level varieties depending on how much pumping energy is required to excite particles to a
metastable state and produce a population inversion. The absorption of photons results in the (*)
spontaneous emission of incoherent radiation that competes with the collimated and coherent radiation
produced by stimulated emission in these devices. For 10 points, name these devices that produce high
intensity, monochromatic radiation through light amplification.
ANSWER: lasers [or Light Amplification through Stimulated Emission of Radiation]
One laboratory technique using these devices involves taking depositions from a plume created by a
conversion to plasma and is known as this type of "ablation." Examples of these devices include YAG and
YLF, and these devices with high spatial and temporal coherence operate by achieving population inversion
in a medium. The first of these devices was created by Theodore H. Mainman, who used a flash tube to
surround a ruby crystal. For 10 points, identify these devices that emit photons by stimulated emission to
emit amplified light that is often red or green.
ANSWER: lasers
The first of these devices was created with a synthetic ruby crystal by Theodore H. Maiman. The first
one of these based on gases used helium and neon. These devices are created by placing a pair of mirrors
on either side of a gain medium, then pumping the gain medium so that the atoms within achieve
population inversion and release photons of a defined energy. For 10 points, name these devices that
produce a beam of monochromatic, coherent light.
ANSWER: laser [or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation]
The "dye" version of these objects tends to be the most versatile because the medium is easy to change.
These objects rely upon a phenomenon known as population inversion, which is created by q-switching.
Using Doppler cooling, a magnetic field and one of these objects was used to cool matter into a BoseEinstein Condensate, and the first of these used a synthetic ruby as the gain medium to create a coherent (*)
monochromatic beam. CD readers and recent attempts at fusion reactors both contain, for ten points, what
device which concentrates light?
ANSWER: lasers (or Light Amplification through Stimulated Emission of Radiation)
One of these devices uses the neodymium ion to dope a YAG host crystal. Optical tweezers operate from
the force created by these devices, which were used to cool rubidium-87 atoms in the creation of the first
Bose-Einstein condensate. Q-switching in these devices causes a phenomenon in which the number of
particles in an excited state exceeds the number in a lower energy state, called population inversion. The
gain medium of these devices provides energy during pumping, and the optical cavity consists of a pair of
mirrors that allows the escape of photons. For 10 points, name these devices that make light coherent
through stimulated emission of radiation.
ANSWER: lasers [or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation before "amplify"]
One type of this device contains a series of magnets with alternating poles called an undulator,
and uses charged particles moving sinusoidally as the medium. These devices were used to cool a
clump of rubidium atoms to create the first (*) Bose-Einstein condensate, and they are also used to
deliver power to a deuterium-tritium pellet in inertial confinement fusion. These devices require a
three-level system, because they rely on population inversion, and simple ones consist of a gain medium
with a pair of mirrors on either side to create a resonator. For 10 points, name these devices which use
changes of energy levels in electrons to generate a coherent beam of light, used in CD players, weapon
sights, and pointers.
ANSWER: Laser [accept more specific answers, like free electron laser; also accept Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation]
The "dye" type of this device commonly consists of rhodamine (ROH-duh-meen) G6 mixed with
methanol. In these devices, a process called q-switching creates a state in which there are more atoms
in an excited state than a ground state called population inversion. Theodore Maiman invented the
first one in 1960 using a synthetic ruby to (*) stimulate the emission of radiation to amplify light. For 10
points, name these devices that commonly produce a coherent, red beam of light in devices such as CD
players.
ANSWER: lasers [accept light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation before "stimulate" is read]
These devices cannot be created from two-level systems because the upward and downward transitions
occur at equal rates, a result explained by Einstein's A and B coefficients. These devices function when
more molecules exist in higher energy states than lower energy ones, called population inversion. The
helium-neon type of these devices produces 543-, 633-, or 1150-nanometer light. For 10 points, name these
devices that produce coherent beams of light from the stimulated emission of radiation.
ANSWER: lasers [accept masers before "light"]
One technique for achieving a high power output from these devices maintains a low quality factor initially,
and then modulates it to a higher value; that technique is Q-switching. One variety based around sapphire
doped with titanium is made tunable by inserting of an adjustable filter into the resonant cavity. Another
type can be made from a cavity in which the magnetic field varies periodically through space called an
undulator; in that type of this instrument, free electrons oscillating in the undulator radiate coherently. The
generic way to create them is to excite electrons into a metastable state, from which an avalanche process
known as population inversion is triggered to the ground state. For 10 points, name these devices which
stimulate quantum transitions between levels to produce a focused beam of light.
ANSWER: lasers [or Light Amplification through Stimulation of Emitted Radiation]
These devices pulse their output using Q-switching. They are used in combination with the Doppler
effect to cool atoms. They work by inducing population inversion in a gain medium, such as a mixture
of (*) helium and neon. These devices reflect off of the "pits" and "lands" on CDs and DVDs to allow the
data to be read. For 10 points, name these devices that produce coherent light, often red.
ANSWER: lasers
Federico Capasso built one of these devices based on a quantum cascade, and John Madey developed
one that uses a wiggler to create a standing wave of charged particles, called the "free electron" variety.
Gordon Gould fought for decades to get a patent on these devices. They were originally posited in a paper
that defined the A and B coefficients, which are the probabilities of an electron transitioning between states
and emitting a photon in the process. For ten points, name these devices, originally posited by Albert
Einstein, that emit coherent beams of light.
ANSWER: lasers
Though not synchotrons, one type of these devices makes use of wigglers to accelerate electrons through a
transverse magnetic field. In 2012, physicists used one of these devices to create particles which were
successfully quantum teleported 150 kilometers away. These devices use optical pumping to bring the
system to a short-lived state which decays into the most populated metastable state. That's called population
inversion. These devices, which come in a free-electron type, are used to create a transmission hologram.
They create coherent photons through stimulated emission. For 10 points, name these devices which can
make a monochromatic beam of light.
ANSWER: lasers [or light amplification by the stimulated emission of radiation; or masers before "light"]
According to Flynn et al., these devices can experience a type of passive switching when they contain a
polymer that undergoes the Kerr effect. These devices require a pumping mechanism to keep them working
by elevating electrons into a metastable state and maintaining population inversion. These devices are
typically made of a cylindrical cavity with two mirrors at each end with a gain material placed in between.
Holograms are made partially by aiming the product of one of these devices at an object. A coherent
product is produced by these devices, which rely on stimulated emission. For 10 points, name these devices
that produce an intense ray of monochromatic light.
ANSWER: laser [or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation]
The free-electron type of this device uses synchrotron radiation from an undulator, and the
predecessor to this device operates with microwaves and was initially based on ammonia. One of
these devices, the YAL-1, is situated in a Boeing 747, and these devices require (*) population
inversion in order to operate. Common varieties of these devices are based on carbon dioxide and a heliumneon mixture, but most sold are of the diode type. Based on the principle of stimulated emission, for 10
points, name these devices which emit coherent light, used in printers, CD players, eye surgery, and
handheld pointers.
ANSWER: lasers
A sine squared factor in the denominator of the gain-saturation function for these devices causes "spatial
hole burning" in the gain coefficient. That gain coefficient is equal to a threshold value in
"continuous-wave oscillation" of these devices, in which the cavity photon number is constant. These
devices make use of a deviation from thermal equilibrium in which there are more electrons in a higher
energy level than a lower energy level, a phenomenon known as population inversion, though ones that
work without population inversion do so using quantum coherence. For 10 points, name these devices that
produce highly coherent light through stimulated emission of radiation.
ANSWER: lasers [or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation before "stimulated"]
These devices require a pump source and a gain medium, such as a mixture of noble gases or doped
crystals. For these devices to work, the number of atoms in an excited state must be greater than the number
of atoms in the ground state, a condition known as population inversion. The first of these devices was
developed by Theodore Maiman and used a ruby as a gain medium. These devices are used to create a
coherent beam of monochromatic light. For 10 points, name these devices that, as their acronym suggests,
amplify light by stimulated emission of radiation.
ANSWER: lasers [accept light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation before mentioned]
A mythologically-named form of this process is ineffective below the recoil limit, and is dominated by
the dipole force, which does not saturate. Some forms of this technique are ineffective when a certain
value is less than "pi times h-bar times the natural linewidth divided by Boltzmann's constant". One
form of this technique operates in the presence of three mutually-orthogonal polarization gradients
and produces a velocity-dependent force with a damping coefficient proportional to the partial of the
scattering force with respect to angular frequency. The most common form of it, discovered around
the same time as chirping, widens an atomic transition over the length of a solenoid via the (*)
Zeeman effect to facilitate the scattering of Doppler-shifted photons. For 10 points, name this process,
another example of which is "optical molasses", in which a certain light-amplifying device is used to
decelerate particles.
ANSWER: laser cooling [prompt on "cooling"; prompt on "optical trapping"]
A variation of this technique using orthogonally polarized emissions is named for Sisyphus, and this
technique can be followed up by the resolved sideband method. The lower limit of this technique is
equal to Planck's constant times the natural linewidth divided by two times the Boltzmann's
constant. The apparatus in this technique is tuned to just below the atomic transition energy so that
particles moving towards the source will absorb more (*) photons. This technique, which was developed
by Philips, Cohe-Tannoudji, and Chu, was used along with a magnetic trap by Cornell and Wiemann on a
gas of rubidium atoms in order to create the first Bose-Einstein condensate. For 10 points, name this
technique that uses a coherent beam to chill a sample to several hundred microkelvin.
ANSWER: laser cooling [or Doppler cooling]
In the 1-dimensional case, this system is the most elementary application of Floquet's theorem. To
analyze this system, one can write the Schroedinger equation as a sum of plane waves obeying the
Born-von Karman boundary condition. A series of finite square wells is used to simplify this system
in the Kronig-Penney model. For this system, the eigenstates of a one-electron Hamiltonian can be
chosen as a plane wave times a function whose properties accord with the primitive (*) translation
vectors, according to Bloch's theorem. Electronic band structure is yielded by analysis of this system. This
system is defined by a unit cell and the complete set of them that can fill a 3-dimensional space were
defined
by Bravais. For 10 points, name this system that consists of repeating arrays of atoms.
ANSWER: particle in a 1-dimensional periodic crystal lattice [or obvious equivalents, such as particle in a 1-dimensional periodic crystal lattice or particle in a 1-dimensional periodic potential; or Kronig-Penney model until it is read]
One approximation related to these objects states that the index of refraction minus one times the
difference between the reciprocal of the radii of curvature equals the inverse of a certain quantity. That
approximation is the thin "this device" approximation. When an object is placed off their primary axis they
create comas. Their focal length over their focal length minus their distance from an object is equal to their
magnifying power. For 10 points, name these optical devices that refract light and come in concave and
convex forms.
ANSWER: lens
Gradient-index ones have a variable spatial distribution of indexes. Metamaterials can be used to create
"super" ones. These are subject to chromatic and spherical abberation. For thin ones, an approximation
exists to the formula named for the maker of one. Converging ones include those that are biconvex. An
important feature of them is their focal length. For 10 points, name these optical implements which refract
light which can be found in glasses.
ANSWER: lens
One of these corrects for spherical aberrations and is a Schmidt corrector plate. A condition under
which these objects function properly both on- and off-axis is named for Ernst Abbe. These objects
may be called meniscus, (*) biconcave, or biconvex depending on the curvature of each of their two faces.
An equation named for the "thin" type of them relates the radii of curvature of their surfaces, their index of
refraction, and their focal length, and they may produce either real or virtual images. For 10 points, name
these objects often made of glass that refract light, found in eyeglasses and microscopes.
ANSWER: lenses
In particle accelerators, a magnetic analogue of these devices consists of a series of quadrupole magnets.
When these devices are dispersive, they are said to suffer from a chromatic defect. In one phenomenon
named for these objects, geodesics are bent around a massive object, yielding results like a four-pointed
Einstein cross surrounding a massive galaxy. The power of these devices is measured in units of inverse
length and is conventionally given in diopters. An approximation named for a "thin" one can be used to
compute their focal lengths. Non-ideal ones suffer from coma and other optical aberrations. For 10 points,
name these objects that refract light.
ANSWER: lens [prompt on "focuser" or "collimator"]
The so-called "circle of confusion" is a point at which one of these devices fails. An approximation
made with these objects is that "one over f equals n minus one," is named for a "maker" of these
devices, and applies only if they are (*) "thin." These objects cause spherical and chromatic aberrations.
The magnification of one of them is equal to the negative quotient of its distance from the image and from
the object. Virtual images form on the same side of these devices as the object, as these devices work by
refracting light through the focus, unlike mirrors. For ten points, name these devices which focus light and
are used in microscopes.
ANSWER: lenses (accept more specific answers like concave or convex lenses)
The Littrow variety of these objects is prone to the development of ghost images, which is reduced in the
Clark type and eliminated in the oil-spaced doublet. One of the two parts of these lens types traditionally
contained a lot of lead oxide, but it now usually contains titanium dioxide or zirconium dioxide in an effort
to lower the Abbe number. In addition to that diverging flint glass, there is often fluorite or lanthunum in the
converging crown glass to lower dispersion. Name this type of lens designed to reduce fringing and false
color by bringing two wavelengths, usually red and blue, to the same focus point.
ANSWER: achromatic lenses [prompt on lenses before mentioned]
It explains why an aluminum block would fall very slowly when dropped in an MRI. It is popularly
demonstrated using by dropping a magnet down a copper tube. According to this law of electromagnetism,
a closed wire loop will have a clockwise electric current when a magnet approaches it south-pole-first. A
consequence of the conservation of energy, it states that a change in magnetic flux must produce a current
such that the magnetic field associated with the current opposes the original field, according to the righthand rule. FTP, name this law that gives the direction of a current induced by a changing magnetic flux.
ANSWER: Lenz's Law
Because Jupiter's gravity pulled its orbit off course, it was not nearly as strong during 1899. Its first known
sighting occurred in 585, though heavy study into it was not initiated until it happened most famously on
November 1833, where Native Americans know it as "the night the stars fell." Heinrich Olbers erroneously
predicted a return every 33 years, though it happens every year. Coincidentally, 33 years later, a sixthmagnitude comet was seen near the Big Dipper named Tempel-Tuttle, whose orbit usually seemed to
precede this event. For 10 points, what is this meteor shower that occurs every mid-November, which
appears to be emitted from a zodiac constellation?
ANSWER: Leonids
Physicists believe that these types of particles far outnumbered other types beginning one second after the
Big Bang until the universe cooled to one billion Kelvins. In order for the number named after these
particles to be conserved, a neutron admits a third particle when it decays in addition to a proton and an
electron. Only the most massive type of this particle is capable of emitting a W boson, and one of these
particles was formerly believed to be a meson. This family includes the different types of neutrinos and their
associated particles, including the tau and the muon. Identify this family of six particles that includes the
electron.
ANSWER: leptons
The Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata matrix predicts the oscillations of one group of these, a behavior which gives
them mass. The Koide formula gives a possibly serendipitous relationship between the masses of another
group of them, while the Michel parameters give the distribution of decays that occur within that group.
Particles from both groups are produced in beta decay. Incapable of interaction via the strong nuclear force,
for 10 points, identify this class of fundamental particles which include the neutrino and the electron.
ANSWER: leptons
A pair of these particles is created in a Drell-Yan process.The Higgs boson can decay into 4 of this
type of particle via an intermediate of two Z bosons. These particles are fired at the insides of
hadrons to probe their structure in deep inelastic scattering experiments. Examining the number of
these particles before and after a particle interaction yields 4 conservation laws: one for the total
amount of these particles and 3 for the different types of them. In addition to (*) quarks, this type of
particle is divided into three generations, each containing one neutral particle and one particle with a charge
of minus 1. For 10 points, name this group of 6 fermionic elementary particles which includes the neutrinos,
the tauon, muon, and electron.
ANSWER: leptons [if they buzz with any specific type of lepton (read the giveaway), prompt them by asking them to give a more general answer]
This quantity can be calculated as the product of density, free-stream velocity and circulation. A
condition used to calculate this quantity fixes the rear stagnation point and is the Kutta condition. A
spinning spherical projectile experiences this force in the Magnus effect. The coefficient for this force is
typically plotted against the angle of attack. This force can be explained as the result of a pressure
differential that results from a flow traveling a greater distance and faster speed over the top of a certain
object, according to Bernoulli's principle. Because this force's direction is perpendicular to oncoming flow,
it is often contrasted with drag. For 10 points, identify this upward acting force on an aircraft wing.
ANSWER: lift [prompt on mechanical aerodynamic force]
One version of these devices uses a polymer of p-phenylene vinylene deposited into a thin film, while
others can use tris(8-hydroxy-quinolinato)-aluminum with tryphenylamine transport layers.
Common materials used to create these devices include Indium gallium nitride and gallium arsenide
phosphide built upon sapphire substrates, and some versions of these devices can be coated with (*)
phosphor to alter their properties. Those aforementioned organic ones have large numbers of conjugated pi
bonds. These devices necessary have direct bandgaps rather than indirect ones, because materials with
indirect bandgaps have fast, non-radiative transitions. The emitted wavelength is proportional to the
bandgap energy. For 10 points, name this type of diode that fires visible photons.
ANSWER: Light-emitting Diodes [or LEDs]
Typically, one side is flat and has a shorter lead to mark the cathode side, as they must be inserted in
the right direction. The flat side corresponds to a straight line segment on one side of their circuit
diagram symbol. In AC applications where the current exceeds the breakdown voltage, they can be
protected by placing a second one in inverse parallel. Although they are much more reliable than
incandescent sources, (*) they can still be damaged by a sudden change in temperature, which might cause
cracks to form in the epoxy resin in the packaging. Aluminum gallium arsenide is used in red and infrared
ones, while blue ones require a quantum well and are thus more expensive to produce and rarer. The color
of the plastic casing does not significantly affect the color. FTP, name this electronic device which exhibits
electroluminescence and allows current to flow in only one direction.
ANSWER: Light-Emitting Diode (prompt on "diode")
These devices are generally covered with a hemispherical package which is designed to be
perpendicular to their escape cones. These components suffer a loss of efficiency above ten to twenty
milliamps, which was recently discovered to be caused by Auger recombination; that is their
namesake (*) droop. Epoxy degradation and differentiated phosphor degeneration are methods by which
these devices can fail. One variety of these devices uses either active matrix or passive matrix addressing
schemes; that organic variety of these devices can be used in flexible displays. The frequency of these
objects- outputs is determined by the bandgap of the semiconductor that makes up a p-n junction; at that
junction, electrons fall into holes to release photons. For 10 points, name these diodes used in illumination.
ANSWER: LED (or light-emitting diode)
Frank's free energy density is important in the study of this type of substance, as it helps describe
elastic properties and distortions. One model to describe a type of it considers rods oriented in
parallel and off-parallel, and predicts that the off parallel state is more probable because repulsion
between the hard rods occurs. A small electric field applied to types of this can trigger a shift from a
twisted helical configuration in the TN effect. The aforementioned model by Onsager describes a rod
shaped type of this substance that also has thread-like defects called disclinations. It was first
discovered in derivatives of (*) cholesterol, which gives its name to the cholesteric phase of this. The
lower temperature smectic form is ordered positionally in contrast to the more commonly studied nematic
phase. For 10 points, name this type of substance between a solid and a liquid that are used in many
monitors and televisions.
ANSWER: liquid crystals [prompt on LC]
Feynman and Bijl developed the first successful method of finding the excitation spectrum of one form of
this substance. A theory of order in the bosonic form of this substance was developed by Penrose and
Onsager, and is known as the "off-diagonal long-range order" model. Anthony Leggett used an analogue of
BCS theory to explain the second-order transition in one form of this substance; that form of it is the only
known perfect Fermi fluid. One form of this substance undergoes a phase transition at 2.17 Kelvin, a
temperature known as its lambda point. Both forms of this substance can become superfluidic, as
demonstrated by Osheroff and Lee's experiments with its isotope 3. For 10 points, identify this substance
which exists below 4.2 and 3.2 Kelvin for the 4 and 3 isotopes respectively, a condensation of the secondlightest element.
ANSWER: liquid helium [prompt on helium; prompt on superfluid before it is mentioned]
The nearest group of galaxies to it is the IC342/Maffei Group, which may have been ejected from it during
their early formation. One candidate for a dark galaxy within it includes Smith's Cloud, while the
Monoceros Ring is a ring of stars within it. The membership of NGC 3109 is questionable due to its
distance from the center of this entity, while the only unbarred spiral galaxy within it is the Triangulum
Galaxy. The largest galaxy in it is the Andromeda Galaxy, with around a trillion stars, though Andromeda
might not be the most massive. Name this group of galaxies which includes the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Local Group
Taking the curl of the static member of this set yields a Helmholtz equation for one of the governed
quantities with a constant equal in cgs units to minus four pi carrier density fundamental charge
squared over electron rest energy. This set of equations can be reduced to the single equation minus
speed of light, carrier density, fundamental charge squared over electron rest energy all times vector
potential equals current density, but only in the Coulomb gauge, which is the same as these
equations- namesake gauge. The aforementioned Helmholtz equation constant is the inverse square
of a quantity that gives the e-folding distance of external fields, that being the (*) penetration depth
named for these equations. For 10 points, name this pair of equations that give the electromagnetic fields in
a type-one superconductor in terms of phenomenological variables.
ANSWER: the London equations
Two scientists with this name derived a version of the Clausius-Mossotti formula which relates refractive
index to polarizability. Another scientist with this name wrote a paper about his namesake "attractor" and
gave one of the first descriptions of chaos theory. Another scientist with this name wrote "On Aggression"
and performed an experiment in which he imprinted newborn geese upon himself. A physicist with this
name derived a series of transforms within Minkowski space which take one relativistic reference frame to
another. For 10 points, give the common last name of these scientists, with first names Ludvig, Konrad, and
Hendrik.
ANSWER: Lorenz [or Lorentz]
A model named for him and Drude calculates dispersion by showing how light interacts with charged
harmonic oscillators. A force proportional to charge squared times jerk is named for him and Dirac and
Abraham, and is also known as the radiation reaction force. Along with Cauchy, he names a lineshape that
describes pressure broadening in spectral lines and which is also known as a Breit-Wigner distribution. He
is also the partial namesake of an equation for the index of refraction of a dilute gas, equivalent to one
named for Clausius and Mossotti. He also names a phenomenon sometimes also named for Fitzgerald, his
namesake contraction. For 10 points, name this Dutch physicist whose namesake transformations are central
to special relativity.
ANSWER: Hendrik Antoon Lorentz
The proper and improper groups named for this physicist, which have determinant one and negative one
respectively, form the Lie group O(3,1). Although not Poincare, this physicist names a relation from which
the rapidity is defined. That relation is between two inertial frames and is valid for an observer moving at
constant velocity. One quantity named for this physicist is equal to one over the square root of one minus
relative velocity squared over speed of light squared. This physicist proposed the idea of length contraction.
For 10 points, identify this physicist who names a factor that is denoted gamma and used in special
relativity.
ANSWER: Hendrik Antoon Lorentz
The convolution of the Gaussian profile and his profile gives the Voigt profile. Accelerating charged
particles experience a recoil force when they radiate named for Abraham and this man. When
supplemented by translations, the group of transformations named for him becomes the
inhomogeneous Poincare group. He developed a rotation in Minkowski space that preserves the
spacetime interval between events, and he names the force experienced by a charged particle due to
electromagnetic fields. For 10 points, identify this man who, independently of George Fitzgerald, proposed
that an observer who in motion relative to an object will see the object contracted.
ANSWER: Hendrik Anton Lorentz
With a similarly named Danish mathematician, this physicist names an equation relating refractive index to
polarizability, which in the context of dielectric is named for Clausius and Mossotti. He developed a
mathematical description of boosts in Minkowski space, and he is the namesake of the sum of the force on a
particle due to electric and magnetic fields. His attempts with FitzGerald to explain the Michelson-Morley
experiment led to a namesake length contraction. For 10 points, name this Dutch physicist whose
"transformations" describe spacetime in special relativity
ANSWER: Hendrik Antoon Lorentz
This scientist developed a model for the construction of the Afsluitdijk flood dam, part of which is now
named in his honor. This scientist developed a "Theory of Electrons" that later developed into his theory of
an immovable ether, and he also coined the term "local time". He names the last two symmetries of the
Poincare group, which are rotations and boosts. His namesake factor equals one divided by the square root
of one minus beta squared, and he also names the force experienced by a point charge due to electric and
magnetic fields. For ten points, identify this Dutch scientist who formulated a series of namesake
transformations used in special relativity.
ANSWER: Hendrik Lorentz
Along with Cauchy, this man co-names a probability distribution with no defined mean and infinite
second moment. In addition to naming some operations that form a subgroup of the Poincare group and
that preserve the spacetime interval in Minkowski space, he names the force that acts on a point charge
due to electromagnetic fields, and along with Fitzgerald he names a length contraction observed at high
velocities. For 10 points, name this man whose "transformations" convert between reference frames in
special relativity.
ANSWER: Hendrik Lorentz
One group named for this man is a six-dimensional non-compact Lie group represented as SO(1,3) ["S
O of one comma three"] With a Danish physicist, this man independently discovered a relation between
temperature and index of refraction. This scientist noted that an observer of an object traveling near the
speed of light would see its length contract, an effect he names with Fitzgerald. This man's factor is
proportional to the square root of one minus the square of the relative velocity divided by the square of the
speed of light. For 10 points, name this Dutch physicist who developed a transform used for observations in
special relativity and names the magnetic force felt by a moving charge.
ANSWER: Hendrik Lorentz
Scalar fields are by definition invariant under these operations. In chiral theories, particles are
sorted into left- and right-handed based on whether they belong to the fundamental or antifundamental 
representations of the group of these operations. These operations form a six-dimensional non-compact Lie 
group whose identity group is SO-plus-1-comma-3. Maxwell's equations are invariant under these operations. 
These operations can be written as (*) four-by-four matrices in which the diagonal entries are either 1 or the 
hyperbolic cosine of phi. These operations can be visualized as hyperbolic rotations by the angle of the rapidity 
in Minkowski space, and in the limit of low speed the simply reduce to the Galilean transformations. For 10 points,
name this operation which converts observations between two different frames of reference in special relativity.
ANSWER: Lorentz transforms [prompt on boost]
This object can be understood as a four-by-four matrix with diagonal entries hyperbolic cosine
rapidity, hyperbolic cosine rapidity, 1, and 1 and upper-left off-diagonal entries negative hyperbolic
sine rapidity. In that representation, the rapidity angle is given by minus half the principle logarithm
of the ratio of the speed of light minus x-speed and speed of light plus x-speed, so this operation can
be understood as a hyperbolic rotation of (*) Minkowski space. Applying this operation to a spatial
coordinate yields the quantity coordinate minus parallel velocity times time all times square root quantity
one minus square of parallel speed over speed of light. It reduces to the Galilean at low speeds. For 10
points, name this transform that converts between different inertial reference frames- spacetime and that is
fundamental to special relativity.
ANSWER: the Lorentz transformation [or Lorentz group or Lorentzian]
For noncentrosymmetric crystal structures, this phenomenon can occur when mechanical stress
excites trapped nitrogen gas via generation of electric fields at fracture sites. Its efficiency can be
enhanced by alkali halides, which serve as coactivators or fluxes, and the (*) sono- variety occurs when
sound waves bombard gaseous bubbles in a liquid. It can be classified based on whether or not the
electronic transition occurs between energy levels of different multiplicity. For 10 points, enzyme-catalyzed
oxidation of a luciferin produces the bio form in fireflies of what phenomenon, the emission of light from a
cold body, as opposed to incandescence.
ANSWER: luminescence [prompt on fluorescence or phosphorescence]
This substance's namesake "drag theory" gained support in the Fizeau experiment. Lorentz
transformations were first proposed to scale from this substance's "rest system" to a "moving system." The
existence of this substance was discredited by the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment. For 10
points, name this now-discredited theoretical substance that was thought to be the medium that carries light.
ANSWER: luminiferous ether [or aether]
An attempt to measure the impact of this matter was made in an underwater experiment by Fizeau, which he
believed confirmed a theory put forth by Fresnel. Used by Newton to explain refraction, an attempt to
explain a property of this led to the contraction hypothesis put forward by George Fitzgerald, Oliver Lodge,
and Hendrik Lorentz. The contractions were used in the theory which explained how this substance does not
exist, the special theory of relativity. Name this substance not found by the Michelson-Morley Experiment
which was supposed to be responsible for carrying forces and light.
ANSWER: luminiferous ether
Dayton Miller defended the existence of this entity, but Shankland later published a definitive criticism
of Miller's experiments. The Fizeau experiment confirmed the "dragging" hypothesis for this substance.
The results of an experiment with an interferometer deviated from the expected 0.4 fringe shifts, disproving
the existence of this substance in observations by Michelson and Morley. For ten points, name this fictitious
medium through which light was theorized to travel.
ANSWER: luminiferous aether
Planets moving through this substance would cause this substance's "wind." The Lorentz contraction was
originally proposed to explain the existence of this substance. The existence of this substance was disproven
by an experiment that used an interferometer to split and rejoin light waves; that experiment was the
Michelson-Morley experiment. Name this hypothetical substance, a medium for light to travel in.
ANSWER: luminiferous aether
Larmor proved that Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction is a result of Lorentz transformations in a paper
titled "[this] and Matter." Stokes- "Silly Putty" Model describes it as a rigid solid for high frequency
oscillations and a fluid for low frequency oscillations. Maxwell attempted to measure its effect on the
Earth's motion, but its existence was disproved by an experiment that involved an interferometer, and
was conducted by Michelson and Morley. For 10 points, name this hypothetical substance necessary for
the transmission of light waves.
ANSWER: luminiferous ether [or luminiferous aether]
For an object at high redshift, a K-correction must be applied to this quantity to convert it to an equivalent
measurement in the rest frame of the object. Dividing a body's kinetic energy by this quantity gives its
Kelvin-Helmholtz time scale. An empirical law sets this quantity for a main-sequence star proportional to its
mass to the 3.5th power. The fifth root of one hundred is known as Pogson's ratio because N. R. Pogson
developed the Hipparchus scale for measuring a logarithmic variety of this quantity, which is called
"apparent" if measured from the perspective from the earth. For 10 points, name this quantity which is
proportional to the fourth power of temperature in the Stefan-Boltzmann equation, the energy per unit time
emitted by a stellar object.
ANSWER: luminosity [or apparent magnitude; or absolute magnitude; prompt on "brightness"]
The incremental distributional value of this quantity for a given sliver of the mass distribution of
stars can be found from the Schecter function. For main sequence stars, this value is approximately
proportional to the 3.9th power of the star's mass, and one law for calculating this quantity sets it
proportional to the fourth power of the stellar velocity dispersion; that law only applies to elliptical
galaxies. For a spiral galaxy can be found from the amplitude of its rotation curve in the Tully-Fisher
relation. Often calculated for a blackbody by multiplying 4 pi r squared times the result of the StefanBoltzmann law, for 10 points, name this quantity, which is equal to the energy radiated by an astronomical
body per unit time.
ANSWER: Luminosity
This property forms the basis of a classification scheme for active galactic nuclei developed by Fanaroff and
Riley. One empirical law gives this property as a function of the velocity dispersion of an elliptical galaxy,
while for spiral galaxies, it can be found from an empirical fit to the logarithm of the amplitude of maximum
rotation. Given by the Faber-Jackson and Tully-Fisher relations for galaxies, stars for which this property
exceeds the Eddington limit will be unstable. Two objects' relative magnitude is proportional to the
logarithm of quotient of their values for this property, which can be found from the temperature and radius
of an object via the Stefan-Boltzmann law. For 10 points, name this quantity located on the vertical axis on
the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, equivalent to an object's power output.
ANSWER: Luminosity
Measurements of this quantity are always subject to a Malmquist bias. This property is proportional
to the fourth power of the velocity dispersal, and this quantity is calculated using the Faber-Jackson
and Tully-Fisher relations for elliptical and spiral galaxies. This quantity is larger for objects with
longer periods in systems like (*) Cepheid variables, which have constantly varying values for this
quantity. This quantity is known for standard candles. For 10 points, name this quantity that is plotted
against temperature in the Hertzsprung Russell diagram, which describes objects- brightness.
ANSWER: luminosity [accept magnitude until mentioned]
Active galaxies exhibit a spike of four orders of magnitude in this quantity known as the "big blue
bump." A parametric description of space density as a function of this quantity is named for Paul
Schechter. Malmquist bias affects surveys of astronomical objects by making it appear that further
objects intrinsically have higher values for this quantity. This quantity is related to the velocity width
of (*) spiral galaxies by the Tully-Fisher relation. Stars can be categorized into classes named after this
quantity according to the widths of their spectral lines; those classes are designated by Roman numerals.
Instability results when a star exceeds the Eddington limit for this quantity, and it is proportional to the
fourth power of the temperature. For 10 points, name this quantity representing the energy output per unit
time, a measurement of brightness.
ANSWER: luminosity (prompt on "absolute magnitude" or "brightness" before mentioned)
The function denoted by this term is well approximated by the Schechter function. An anomalous value for
the ratio of mass to this was found when the virial theorem was applied to the Coma cluster by Zwicky. This
quantity can be found from the formula four times pi times the square of stellar radius times the fourth
power of effective temperature times the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. This quantity is be related to velocity
dispersion of elliptical galaxies and the amplitude of the rotation curve of spiral galaxies in the FaberJackson and Tully-Fisher relationships. Henrietta Leavitt elucidated the relationship between this quantity
and the period of Cepheid variables. For 10 points, identify this intrinsic or absolute brightness of an
astronomical object.
ANSWER: luminosity [prompt on light or absolute magnitude or absolute brightness]
The Schechter function gives the number of stars or galaxies with a given value for this property. Some
stars that emit especially powerful stellar wind are in excess of four pi times big G times big M times proton
mass times speed of light over sigma, the Eddington limit for this quantity. This quantity is equal to four pi
R squared times sigma times temperature to the fourth power by a law derived from the Stefan-Boltzmann
equation. The type of this quantity that considers all light wavelengths is called bolometric. For 10 points,
give this astronomical quantity measured by a star's absolute magnitude.
ANSWER: luminosity [accept word forms]
The point at which a star's gravitational pressure equals its radiation pressure is known as the Eddington
limit for this quantity. This quantity is equal to four pi times R squared times temperature to the fourth
power times the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. A relationship between the period of a star and this quantity is
demonstrated in Cepheid variables. This quantity is plotted against temperature on the Hertzsprung-Russell
diagram. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the energy radiated by a star per unit of time.
ANSWER: luminosity
A function named after this quantity was modeled as a power law with an exponential cut-off by Paul
Schechter. Ernst Opik calculated the distance to the Andromeda Galaxy by assuming that the ratio between
its mass and this quantity was constant. It is a power function of rotation rate, according to the Tully-Fisher
relation. The value of this quantity for which a star's gravitational pressure equals its radiation pressure is
known as the Eddington limit. Standard candles have a known value for this quantity, which equals the total
amount of energy produced in one second. It is plotted against temperature in a Hertzsprung-Russell
diagram. For 10 points, name this measure of brightness from which one can compute a star's apparent
magnitude, and which can be measured in lux or lumens.
ANSWER: luminosity [prompt on absolute magnitude; do not accept luminance]
The density of this quantity for a disk is often modelled using an exponential times a
hyperbolic secant squared function. For objects on the main sequence, this quantity is related to
the mass by a 3.9-degree power law. Taking four pi G M c times the mass of the photon, all over
the Thompson scattering cross section, gives an upper bound for it, near which objects have
strong radiation-driven winds. Henrietta Leavitt discovered a relationship between this quantity
and period for Cephied variables, allowing them to be used as standard candles. It is bound by
the Eddington limit and varies as the fourth power of temperature according to an application of
the Stefan-Boltzmann equation. For 10 points, name this measure of a stellar object that is the
energy emitted during a unit of time.
ANSWER: luminosity
Lines separated from their parent lines by large spectral distances are known as his spectral ghosts.
His namesake clouds generate absorption lines in quasar emission spectra at large redshifts that are
known as his alpha (*) forest. The Rydberg equation can be used to calculate his alpha transition and
namesake limit. For 10 points, electron transitions involving the first principle quantum number result in the
emission of what scientist's namesake ultraviolet spectral series for hydrogen?
ANSWER: Theodore Lyman
Charles Steidel discovered a pair of emitters of this phenomenon, one of which was dubbed
the "Newfound Blob". A cloud within Cetus called "Himiko" is noted for emitting this line
strongly, and a type of galaxy named for this distant phenomenon are used to study dark matter
distribution and show this phenomenon due to bursts of star formation. It has a wavelength of
around 1215 angstroms, which is equal to 4 over three times the Rydberg constant. In quasar
spectra, the region next to the Gunn-Peterson trough contains a series of lines caused by this
transition, known as its namesake forest. For 10 points, name this spectral line that is caused by
the electronic transition from the n = 2 to n = 1 state in a hydrogen atom.
ANSWER: Lyman-alpha line [prompt on ultraviolet or UV]
The Prandtl-Glauert singularity occurs immediately before the first integer multiple of the dimensionless
quantity named for him. Also eponymous to him is an optical illusion that consists of contrasting light and
dark bands with a separating narrow strip. Known in his time for his study of both spark and ballistic shock
waves, his other contributions to physics included the investigation of supersonic velocity. FTP, name this
physicist after whom the ratio of the speed of a projectile with the speed of sound is named.
ANSWER: Ernst Mach
False diagnoses can arise from the light and dark lines that appear along borders in grayscale radiology, this
man's namesake bands. When the device named for this man and Ludwig Zehnder is modified to allow for
repeated passes of light, it is known as a Michelson interferometer. Also the namesake of a "tuck", the idea
that an object's acceleration in relation to the universe's center of mass determines its actual inertial
properties is known as his Principle, a term coined by Einstein. His name is sometimes given to the
"dancing diamonds" that result from the atmospheric pressure being greater than the exit pressure of exhaust
plumes on planes. For 10 points, name this scientist whose namesake number gives the ratio of an object's
velocity to the speed of sound in a medium.
ANSWER: Ernst Mach
This man discovered optical illusions such as light and dark "bands" on each side of a brightness
gradient. This positivist discovered the inner ear's vestibular system and denied that atoms existed until
1911. Distant objects like stars affect inertia according to his namesake principle, and his photos showed
that shock waves trail behind travelling bullets. For 10 points, name this German physicist whose namesake
number relates an object's speed to the speed of sound.
ANSWER: Ernst Mach
The square of this quantity appears in the denominator of the Prandtl-Glauert equation, which breaks down
when this quantity is around point seven or above, and it is related to pressure by the Rayleigh Pitot
formula. For ideal gases it is equal to the square root of the Cauchy number, and when it exceeds one,
decreasing the cross section of a tube will reduce the flow speed. For small values of this quantity, flow is
incompressible, and it can be defined as the fluid velocity times the square root of density over the bulk
modulus. This quantity reaches a critical value when speed equals 331 meters per second. For 10 points,
name this ratio of an object's speed to the speed of sound.
ANSWER: Mach number
Either tidal forces or ram-pressure stripping likely created the long cloud of gas that accompanies
these objects, their namesake "stream". The clusters Hodge 301 and R136 are found in an H(II)
region in one of them called the Tarantula Nebula, which itself once contained a blue supergiant that
became Supernova 1987A. They can be found in the constellations (*) Tucana and Dorado. Henrietta
Leavitt's study of period-luminosity relations used Cepheid variables found in these bodies, which are
visible from the southern hemisphere. For 10 points, identify these two dwarf galaxies which orbit the
Milky Way and are named for a Portuguese explorer.
ANSWER: the Magellanic Clouds [or Large and Small Magellanic Clouds; or Nubecullae Magellani]
Earnshaw's theorem applies to these objects, stating that no arrangement of them will result in a stationary
equilibrium of charge. Like the gravitational force, the force between two of these objects decreases
proportionally to r squared. These objects switch from one type of their namesake property to another at the
Curie temperature. Their strength is measured in Teslas, and permanent ones create a constant namesake
field. For 10 points, name these objects that are commonly bar shaped or U-shaped and can be found on
many refrigerators.
ANSWER: magnets [accept all specific types of magnets before "Curie," and accept only magnet after]
These objects display self-organized criticality. Their luminosity can be up to a million times brighter
than the Eddington limit and they can deform atoms to below the relativistic wavelength of the
electron. They were theorized to explain the observation of (*) soft gamma repeaters and anomalous Xray pulsars. They possess internally twisted field lines and are characterized by large-scale dynamo effects
and starquakes. For 10 points, name these neutron stars surrounded by a magnetic field that exceed the
quantum critical limit.
ANSWER: magnetar (prompt on neutron star)
In Larmor precession, this entity causes charged particles to rotate with a frequency proportional to its
strength. The Zeeman effect describes the splitting of spectral lines in the presence of one of these. It can be
computed with the Biot-Savart law, and Ampere's law states that the integral of it over a closed curve is
proportional to the enclosed current. Symbolized B, the one generated by Earth has a strength of
approximately 0.6 Gauss. For 10 points, name this field that is conventionally denoted as travelling from a
north pole to a south pole.
ANSWER: magnetic field [prompt on "B" or "H"]
The presence of Bloch electrons in one of these entities results in Hofstadter's Buttery. A certain
conductance is a function of the product of electron density and Planck's constant divided by the product of
this value and charge in the quantum Hall effect. The Biot-Savart law can be used to calculate this value,
equal to the product of permeability of free space, current, and number of turns for a solenoid. One of
Gauss's Laws states that the divergence of this value is always zero, and particles travelling through it
experience a force perpendicular to its direction. For ten points, name quantity measured in teslas, a vector
field denoted by the letter B.
ANSWER: magnetic field (accept B field before mention)
The complex conjugate of the phasor form of this quantity is used in the time-averaged Poynting vector.
The divergence of this quantity is equal to zero. In free space, it is divided by mu-nought to give its
associated strength. One law for finding this quantity crosses differential length with the displacement unit
vector and another states that it is equal to the current enclosed divided by mu-nought. Those are the
Biot-Savart and Ampere's law. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized B and measured in teslas.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or magnetic flux density; accept B before it is read; do not accept H or magnetic field strength]
The curl of the vector potential A equals this quantity. One equation gives it as proportional to
current times the integral of "dL cross r-hat over r-squared". The divergence of this quantity equals
zero according to one of Maxwell's equations. The Lorentz force on a charged particle equals charge
times velocity cross this quantity. The law of (*) Biot-Savart is used to give differential values for it in
space. The line integral of it equals permeability times current according to Ampere's Law. It is measured in
gausses or Teslas. For ten points, name this quantity symbolized B or H which measures the strength of a
certain field produced between north and south poles.
ANSWER: magnetic field strength (or B or H before mention)
Birefringence results from these entities in the Voigt effect, while light is polarized with a rotation linearly
dependent one of their components in the Faraday effect. The force exerted by them is proportional to the
cross product of these entities with the velocity of a nearby charged particle, and they are expulsed by
superconductors in a phenomenon discovered by Meissner. One differential equation stating that they have
a divergence equal to zero, named after Gauss, is the second of Maxwell's equations. Their strength is
measured in teslas and they are denoted by the letter B. For 10 points, name these entities that often
surround a material that has north and south poles.
ANSWER: magnetic fields
In liquids and gases, the birefringence of light in the presence of a transverse one of these entities is known
as the Cotton-Mouton and Voigt effects, respectively. Small ones can be measured by superconducting
quantum interference devices. There are plateaus in the plot of the Hall voltage versus this quantity.
Spectral lines are split in the presence of one of these in the Zeeman effect. The force on a current-carrying
wire is equal to the product of current, wire length, and the magnitude of this field, which is measured in
units of teslas. For 10 points, name this type of field that is created by a moving charge and whose lines are
continuous, unlike electric fields.
ANSWER: magnetic field(s)
An accretion disk and one of these entities can be used to extract energy from a spinning black
hole in the Blandford-Znajek mechanism. The "ballerina skirt" model was used to describe the
effects of another one of these entities, whose generating body's rotation influences the shape of the
Parker spiral. A star with a particularly strong one of these entities explains bursts from soft gamma
repeaters; those stars are a subtype of (*) neutron stars, whose revolution rate decreases over time due to
these things. The solar wind is guided by one of these entities, whose reconnection causes solar flares. For
10 points, name these entities, the one of which generated by the earth's core is explained by the dynamo
model and influences the direction of compass needles.
ANSWER: magnetic field
In the Paschen-Back effect, this entity causes a disruption in the coupling between the orbital and spin
angular momentum. If this entity is perpendicular to a current in an electrical conductor, it causes a
potential difference in the Hall Effect. Its contour integral is related to the surface integral of total current
density in an equation later modified to include displacement current. It causes splitting of spectral lines in
the Zeeman effect. Given its generating current, this quantity can be calculated by the Biot-Savart law or
Ampere's law. For 10 points, name this type of field caused by a moving electric charge that is measured in
Tesla and symbolized B.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B before mentioned]
In a two-dimensional system, the presence of this entity leads to Landau levels in a phenomenon
wherein topological quantum numbers like the Chern numbers arise in calculating the conductivity
due to this entity; that phenomenon is the quantum (*) Hall effect. Inductors store energy in the form of
this entity, since it arises when current passes through a solenoid, and it is defined as the curl of the vector
potential A. This entity would not be divergence-free if monopoles existed that could operate similar to
electric point charges. For 10 points, name this entity often denoted B, a field most famously present around
materials with north and south poles.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B field before mentioned]
One of the London equations relates the curl of the superconducting current density to this quantity. The
charge times this quantity divided by the mass equals the angular frequency in a cyclotron. This quantity is
equal to the curl of the vector potential. The cross product of the electric field with this quantity is
proportional to the Poynting vector. The Lorentz force on a charged particle has a term proportional to the
cross product of the velocity with this quantity. Gauss's law says that the integral of this quantity through a
closed surface is zero. For 10 points, name this quantity that is generated by moving electric charges, often
measured in Teslas and symbolized B.
ANSWER: magnetic field strength [or B-field before mention, or magnetic flux density]
These entities do not perform any work on an isolated charge, and the divergence of its strength is
always zero. Maxwell found that changing electric fields can generate one of these, and the force on a
particle moving through one of these entities is proportional to the cross product of its velocity and this
entity's strength. They can also be generated by electric currents, and their strength is measured in Gausses
or Teslas. For 10 points, identify this type of field that deflects compass needles.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B-field or H-field]
The diffusion coefficient in Bohm diffusion is equal to Boltzmann's constant times temperature over 16
times charge times this. The Verdet constant relates this and the angle of rotation due to the Faraday effect.
When a charged particle moves through one of these, the force can be given by the charge times the velocity
crossed with this. In a solenoid, it is equal to current times turn density times the permeability constant.
When using the right-hand-rule for a moving charge, the direction of this is represented by the middle
finger, and inductors store their energy in these. Name this type of field measured in tesla, the lines of which
one can see when spreading iron filings around a bar magnet.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B-field, or H-field]
This entity's presence in a two-dimensional conductor creates Landau levels in the quantum hall effect. The
Lorentz force on a particle is given by charge times velocity cross this entity, which is equal to the curl of
the vector potential. They are expelled from superconductors in the Meissner effect, and Faraday's law of
induction describes how a changing one produces an electrical current. They are formed when an electrical
current passes through a solenoid, and Gauss showed that the divergence of these entities is zero unless
monopoles exist. For 10 points, name this entity most commonly associated with objects with north and
south poles.
ANSWER: Magnetic Field [accept B-field]
The rotation of plane-polarized light traveling along the direction of one of these entities can be calculated
using the Verdet constant. Particles segregate by charge when a current flows perpendicular to one of these
entities in the Hall effect, and Ampere's law states that the line integral of this quantity is proportional to the
current passing through a closed loop. One of these entities is produced to oppose a change in flux
according to Lenz's law, and a current flowing through a solenoid produces one of these. For 10 points,
name this field measured in Teslas, the counterpart to the electric field.
ANSWER: Magnetic Field [accept B-field or H-field; prompt on Field before mention]
The sun decreases this entity's linking number, called its helicity, in coronal mass ejections. In the
presence of this entity, the Lyman alpha transition exhibits ten lines instead of two, and the wave
propagation vector is parallel to this entity in Alfven waves. An armature rotates within a stator that
generates this phenomenon in a dynamo, and this entity is expelled from a superconductor in the Meissner
effect. This quantity is proportional to the integral around a loop of wire of the wire element cross the unit
vector to the wire over the distance to the wire squared. For 10 points, give this entity, which exerts a force
on a charged particle proportional to velocity's cross product with it.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B field]
An integral equation for this quantity is the cross-product-integrand Jefimenko equation. This quantity may
be calculated for several point sources by taking the curl of the sum of the space-like parts of the Lienard-
Wiechert potentials due to the point sources, since that sum gives the net vector potential, of which this
quantity is the curl. In another formula, it is proportional to the volume integral of the current density
crossed with position divided by distance cubed. Calculated by that Biot-Savart law, for 10 points, name
this vector field produced by a changing current and proportional in magnitude to the electric field in a
propagating light wave.
ANSWER: magnetic induction [accept magnetic field; prompt on B]
The rotation of plane-polarized light traveling along the direction of one of these can be calculated
using the Verdet constant. This quantity is equal to the curl of the vector potential, and a potential
difference is created across a metal plate when it is applied perpendicular to the current; that
phenomenon is known as the Hall effect. For a solenoid it is equal to the permeability constant times
the number of turns times the current, which can be derived from Ampere's law. For 10 points, identify
this counterpart of the electric field.
ANSWER: magnetic field
Because it is divergence-free, the curl of its vector potential can be used in the Lorentz Force
equation, where it is crossed with velocity, and they do not do any work on objects that move through
them. The Hall effect can be used to find the sign of the charge carriers when a current flows in one of
these. Biot-Savart's law describes the magnitude of these, and its line integral is proportion to the current
according to Ampere's Law. For 10 points, identify this counterpart to the electric field, with strength
measured in Teslas or Gauss.
ANSWER: magnetic fields
At any given point, it consists of both a magnitude and a direction and it can be created via the dynamo
mechanism and excluded from certain entities in the Meissner effect. They can be detected by the force they
exert on moving electric charges, as described by the Lorentz force law, and concentrated using quadrupole
focusing or solenoids. Its generation by an electric current is described by the Biot-Savart law, and its
direction around a wire can be found using the right hand rule. FTP, name these lines of force generated by
objects with north and south poles.
ANSWER: magnetic field
The divergence of this quantity is equal to zero according to Maxwell's equations. Because velocity
is crossed with this quantity in the equation for Lorentz force, it can do no work on an isolated
charge. One can obtain this quantity from the Biot-Savart law, which describes it for the case of
being generated by an (*) electric current. It is usually denoted with a bold B or H and measure in Teslas.
For 10 points, identify this vector field that connects the north and south poles of certain materials.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or magnetic flux density; prompt on B or H until it is read]
This quantity is multiplied by the Verdet constant to calculate specific rotation, and this quantity
perpendicular to the direction of propagation makes the medium birefringent in the Voigt effect. Small
values of this quantity are measured by SQUIDs, and below the critical temperature, it is zero inside
superconductors. Ampere's Law relates the tangential component of it integrated around a closed curve, and
according to Gauss's Law, the net flux of it through any closed surface is zero. FTP name this field that is
caused by a moving point charge.
ANSWER: magnetic field
The object that this quantity is derived from can undergo any transformation that adds the gradient
of a scalar function, and this function will still remain unchanged. One device measures this quantity
with a loop containing two Josephson junctions: that device is a SQUID. This quantity is the curl of a
certain vector (*) potential, and cyclotron radiation results from particles moving through these objects.
The Lorentz force law states that force is proportional to the velocity cross this field, and this field is
divergenceless. For 10 points, name this field that causes a force on moving charges and whose change
creates an electric field.
ANSWER: magnetic field (accept B field or H field)
The Faraday rotation studies the interaction of light and this in a medium, and it induces a quantized
resistivity in the quantum Hall effect. A rotating one of these is used in a dynamo to generate electricity,
and, according to Gauss's Law, it cannot have monopoles. It generates the Lorentz force on moving charged
particles, and it can be calculated with the Biot-Savart Law. The Earth's one can reverse itself, and the SI
unit for it is the tesla. For 10 points, identify this entity, caused by a moving point charge that is the
counterpart of an electric field and has poles.
ANSWER: magnetic fields [prompt on "field", do not accept or prompt on "electric field"]
One of these entities causes the splitting of a spectral line in the Zeeman effect. A potential difference is
produced across a conductor by a perpendicular one of these in the Hall effect, and the path integral of one
of these entities around a closed loop is proportional to enclosed current according to Ampere's law. For 10
points, identify this field whose SI unit is the tesla, which is usually symbolized B and occasionally paired
with an electric field.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B-field before mentioned]
An entity described by this adjective is related to the integral of the current times dl crossed with r-hat
over r to the third by the Biot-Savart (bee-OH sah-VAR) Law. EMF is equal to the negative time derivative
of a flux described by this adjective according to Faraday's law. Another law states that the loop integral of
this type of field is equal to the permeability of free space times the enclosed current. For 10 points, name
this type of field that is integrated in Ampere's law and is related to the electric field.
ANSWER: magnetic field
When this is strong and temperature is low, electrons in the conduction band behave as oscillators
and thus conductivity is quantized in the Shubnikov-van Alphen effect. Using the Josephson effect, a
SQUID can detect this to high precision, and it can cause the separation of (*) Landau levels, in
addition to causing hysteresis, in some metals. Inducing a quantized resistivity in the quantum Hall effect, it
is expelled from superconductors in the Meissner effect. Resulting in a split in p orbital energies of
hydrogen in the Zeeman effect, for 10 points, name this type of field whose divergence is zero according to
Gauss's law for it, thereby disproving the notion of its monopoles.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B-field]
One of these entities causes the polarization plane to be moved in the Faraday Effect, and the Voigt
Effect involves birefringence caused by one of these entities. When a strong one of these disrupts
orbital and spin angular momentum, it is the Paschen-Back Effect, which is an amplified form of the
spectral line splitting caused by one of these entities called the (*) Zeeman Effect. One of these fields is
formed whenever an electric field's strength changes; that phenomenon was proven by Maxwell when he
modified Ampere's law. For 10 points, name this type of field that is responsible for the properties of nickel
and iron's attraction to each other.
ANSWER: magnetic field
This entity is crossed with a particle's velocity in the equation for the Lorentz force. One law that gives the
strength of this entity was modified to include the partial time derivative of the displacement field. The curl
of this entity is equal to permeability of free space times the current density. Silver atoms were fired through
an inhomogeneous version of this entity in the Stern-Gerlach experiment. This entity cannot be created by
monopoles according to Gauss- law. Created by electrical currents, the strength of this entity is given by the
Bios-Savart (Bee-oh Suh-var) law and Ampere's law. For 10 points, name this counterpart of the electric
field, symbolized B.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B]
A strong version of this entity splits spectral lines in the Paschen-Back effect, and one is gradually
excluded as temperature decreases from superconductors in the Meissner effect. In the absence of
current it is equal to the gradient of the scalar potential. It may be calculated using one form of the BiotSavart law, and its loop integral is proportional to the enclosed current by Ampere's law. The force it
exerts on a charge is proportional to the cross product of velocity with it. For 10 points, identify this
divergence-free vector field often paired with an electric one.
ANSWER: magnetic field [do not accept "magnetic potential"; do not accept "vector potential"]
Power lost due to a variation in this quantity is proportional to its peak value squared times frequency
squared, all over resistivity, density, and a constant that is 1 for sheets and 2 for wires. This quantity causes
a combination of circular motion and guiding center drift, and can be measured at low values via a device
with parallel Josephson junctions, known as SQUIDs. Type I and II superconductors differ in the number of
critical values for this quantity, which is crossed with the velocity in the Lorentz force and is given by a line
integral in the Biot-Savart Law. This quantity, which has zero divergence and is the curl of the vector
potential, is expelled from superconductors in the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name this quantity
measured in teslas, whose lines run from north to south poles.
ANSWER: magnetic field [accept B field or H field]
When these entities are extremely weak, their strength is often measure using a device called a SQUID.
NMR spectroscopy involves chemical shift when a sample is placed in one of these entities. A current that
is perpendicular to one of those entities produces a potential difference known as the Hall Effect.
According to Ampere's law their strength is proportional to the electrical current. Their strength, which is a
measured in a unit called Teslas, can be determined using the Biot-Savart law. For 10 points, name this
type of vector field caused by moving electric charges.
ANSWER: magnetic field
One of these objects is twisted into a shape resembling a ballerina's skirt known as the Parker spiral and is
the source of the heliospheric current sheet. Changes in the most famous example of one of these objects
can be seen in the orientation of particles in cooled lava; those changes are reversals. One example of this
object is produced by flowing currents in the outer core. For 10 points, name this type of field, one of which
surrounds Earth and protects it from ultraviolet radiation.
ANSWER: magnetic fields
This entity is equal to the curl of the vector potential. The divergence of this entity is zero, while the
enclosed current is proportional to a closed loop around this entity according to Ampere's Law,
which can be used to show that its strength is increased inside the loops of solenoids. This entity has
units of either (*) gausses or teslas, and is denoted capital B. Rotating examples of these form alternating
current, while their formation from electric currents drive generators. Iron fillings can be used to show, for
10 points, the lines denoting what entity associated with north and south poles?
ANSWER: magnetic field (or B-field; do not accept or prompt on simply "magnetism")
This quantity can contribute an extra term to the thermodynamic identity, making possible an isentropic
cooling method effective at low temperatures. The propagation of light along it induces a rotation in the
polarization vector named for Faraday, and Landau levels are formed in metals when it is applied. An
inhomogenous arrangement of this quantity in space was key to conducting the Stern-Gerlach experiment,
and its breaking of degeneracies in atomic energy levels is known as the Zeeman effect. A material's
delayed reaction to an externally applied one is known as hysteresis, and a spin will precess about one of
these with the Larmor frequency. For ten points, identify this divergence-free component of a fundamental
force whose cross-product with velocity is proportional to the Lorenz force with which it deflects charged
particles.
ANSWER: magnetic field or B or H
This entity causes charge separation in the Hall effect. This entity is proportional at a point p to the
integral of the cross product of an infinitesimal length of wire with the unit displacement vector from p to
the wire over the square of the length of that displacement vector, per the law of Biot and Savart. A particle
experiences a force due to this entity proportional to the product of its magnitude with its speed, and
perpendicular to its velocity. For 10 points, name this entity, which is contrasted with an electric field.
ANSWER: magnetic field [or B field]
This quantity is the denominator in the formula for reluctance, and this quantity can be calculated by taking
a line integral of the magnetic vector potential. The line integral of the electric field around a closed loop is
equal to the negative change in this quantity with respect to time according to Faraday's law of induction.
According to Gauss's law for magnetism, this quantity is equal to zero for a closed surface, and this quantity
is equal to the dot product of magnetic field and area. Measured in webers, For 10 points, name this
measure of the strength of the magnetic field through a surface.
ANSWER: Magnetic Flux [prompt on Flux]
The radiation emitted during orbital-electron capture is a consequence of the disappearance of the charge
and of this quantity. Taking the cross product of this quantity with the position vector and dividing it by the
absolute value of the position vector cubed yields a quantity proportional to the dipole vector potential. The
quantum of this quantity is given by the fundamental charge times h-bar over the quantity two times electron
mass times the speed of light. As an adiabatic invariant, the conservation of this quantity results in the
creation of a namesake bottle used in plasma confinement. One of these will precess about an applied field
with the Larmor frequency, and the torque on a current loop is given by the cross product of this quantity
with the magnetic field. Quantized in units of the Bohr magneton, for 10 points, identify this vector quantity
which gives the magnitude and direction of an object's magnetic field.
ANSWER: magnetic moment [accept electron charge or fundamental charge before the first mention of "charge"]
These entities can enhance the s-wave component of fermion wave functions through the CallanRubakov effect. Hooft suggested that a topological excitation present in the non-abelian Higgs model
was one of these entities. The lower bound for their mass is obtained from the Bogomol'nyi bound,
and in the (*) Witten effect, fermion interactions convert them to dyons. Their existence would explain the
quantization of electric charge according to Dirac. For 10 points, name these hypothetical particles that
posses a magnetic charge.
ANSWER: magnetic monopole
The Montonen-Olive Duality Conjecture concerns a field theory in which these particles exist as
solitons; that theory was developed by 't Hooft and Polyakov. The original hypothesis of these particles-
existence requires the use of two separate vector potentials and a singularity, and was developed by Paul
Dirac. Gauss's Law of Magnetism, which states that the divergence of a magnetic field is zero, implies that
these particles cannot exist. For 10 points, name these hypothetical particles that can only have an isolated
North or South pole.
ANSWER: magnetic monopoles [prompt on monopole]
In one derivation of these particles, pairs of them are connected by a Dirac string, and the derivation of
these particles is analogous to a form of the Aharonov-Bohm effect. Stanford physicist Blas Cabrera
supposedly detected one of these particles on Valentine's Day in 1982. These particles violate Gauss's law
for magnetism, which states that the divergence of a magnetic field is zero, and one of these particles would
add a term to Faraday's law in Maxwell's equations. For 10 points, identify these hypothetical particles, the
magnetic equivalent of a point charge which has only one pole.
ANSWER: magnetic monopoles
Blas Cabrera may have detected one of these particles in February of 1982, but those results were
never duplicated, and "spin ice" is very similar to one. Paul Dirac showed that the existence of these
particles implies that electric charge is quantized, and many grand unified theories suggest their
existence. One of (*) Gauss's Laws claims that the divergence of a certain field is zero, meaning that none
of these entities exist. For ten points, identify this hypothetical particle from physics, a magnetic analogue
of a point charge, which is missing either a north or south end.
ANSWER: magnetic monopoles
These particles are a topological defect in compact U(1) gauge theories, and they are equivalent to dyons
with no charge. One of these without singularities is named for t-Hooft and Polyakov, while another derived
from Yang-Mills theory has a potential of 1 over r everywhere and is named for Wu and Yang. Cabrera
reported finding one of these using a SQUID on Valentines- Day, 1982, and Dirac showed that they imply
the quantization of electric charge; however, they violate one of Maxwell's equations. For 10 points, name
these particles ruled out by Gauss- Law for Magnetism, a particle with non-zero magnetic charge.
ANSWER: magnetic monopole
In Yang-Mills theory, one solution for it is named for t' Hooft and Polyakov. In some Grand Unified
Theories, it is equivalent to the most basic state of a dyon. In another formulation, it is a topological defect
in a compact U(1) gauge theory, and its existence is the subject of Dirac's quantization condition. The
vector potential cannot be defined globally because the divergence of its curl is nonzero at the locus of this
object, whose existence would imply modifications to Faraday's law of induction and Gauss's law of
magnetism. For 10 points, name this theoretical fundamental unit of magnetic charge.
ANSWER: Magnetic monopole
The Hedgehog is one of these and reduces to the Dirac one sufficiently far from the origin, and they
are examples of topological solitons, and some Grand Unified Theories posit that dyons are merely
excited ones. Their existence leads naturally to a condition also named for Dirac, which explains why
charges are quantized; moreover, if they exist, then Maxwell's equations may be written symmetrically,
having introduced a new kind of point charge. For 10 points, identify these hypothetical objects that
lack distinct north and south ends.
ANSWER: magnetic monopoles
If sufficiently light, these particles could be produced in a Drell-Yan type process which would occur in
proton-antiproton collisions at the Tevatron. The first solution to the Yang-Mills equation was one of these
particles named for Wu and Yang, and Dirac showed that these particles imply quantization of electric
charge. Providing symmetry to Maxwell's equations, these particles contradict the fact that the divergence
of the B-field is zero, thereby violating Gauss's law for magnetism. For 10 points, identify these particles,
the magnetic analogues of charge with either north or south-oriented directions.
ANSWER: magnetic monopole
These particles are created by the breaking of a G gauge group's symmetry in a model developed
by 't Hooft and Polyakov, and they are equivalent to a dyon with no charge. The first solution to the
Yang-Mills field equation was one of these entities named for Wu and Yang. Before joining CDMS,
Blas Cabrera used a SQUID to observe one of these particles on Valentine's Day, 1982. The (*)
MoEDAL experiment at the LHC looks for these particles. These particles are produced in large quantities
at the GUT scale, but inflation explains why their density is low. They were first postulated by Paul Dirac
and would necessitate a modification of Gauss- law of magnetism if discovered. For 10 points, name these
hypothetical particles which only a north or south end.
ANSWER: magnetic monopoles
In supersymmetric theories that assume these objects, the Bogomol-nyi Bound comes out naturally. These
have been used to explain the anomalous Hall effect in ferromagnetic crystals, and infinitesimal solenoids
with flux 2(pi) over e are indistinguishable from these objects. Physicists have tried to detect these entities
using SQUIDs, and a recent proposal to realize something like them involves potentially using bismuth
selenide or telluride with strong spin-orbit coupling, and an electron brought close to this surface would
induce a constantly circulating current. For 10 points, name these hypothetical entities whose existence,
according to Dirac, would explain charge quantization and invalidate one of Maxwell's equations.
ANSWER: magnetic monopoles
The Evans balance is used to measure this quantity. In MRI, the BOLD venography technique exploits
differences in this property among tissues, oxygenated blood, and deoxygenated blood. Often separate
static and frequency-dependent values of this are reported. In an isotropic material, the permeability is
equal to the vacuum permeability times the quantity one plus this value. It is negative for diamagnetic
objects. It can be obtained by dividing the magnetization by the applied magnetic field and is symbolized
chi. For 10 points, name this measurement of a material's magnetization response to a magnetic field.
ANSWER: the magnetic susceptibility [prompt on chi; prompt on susceptibility]
In antenna theory it can be obtained from the superposition of one turn of the helical antenna
translated along the z-axis. Its physical significance was demonstrated in an experiment in which a
shielded solenoid produced interference in an external (*) field-free region. Since its divergence has no
physical significance, the Lorenz gauge can be used to separate it from the electric scalar potential and its
nature was elucidated in the Aharonov-Bohm experiment. For 10 points, name this vector field with a curl
that equals the magnetic field.
ANSWER: magnetic vector potential [or magnetic potentia]
The second of Maxwell's equation states that the flux of this phenomenon on a closed surface is always
zero. The strength of this phenomenon's field is measured in Teslas and its flux is measured in Webers. The
force of this of a charged particle is equal to the cross product of the particle's velocity and the field it
moves in multiplied by the charge of the particle. Its field is made of dipoles and lines traveling from its
"north" pole to the "south" pole. For 10 points, name the force responsible for metal objects attracting or
repelling and also responsible for pointing compass needles north.
ANSWER: magnetism [accept equivalents like magnetic force; prompt on "electrogmagnetic force" or "electromagnetism"]
Measurements of the 60 kHz emissions from this region of Uranus were used by Voyager to determine that
Uranus rotates once every 172.4 hours. A goal of the Cassini mission is to produce a full map of this region
of Saturn, through which the passage of Titan traces a torus, while on Jupiter, Io's interaction with this
region contributes to the decameter emission through cyclotron radiation. On Mars and Venus, this region
forms through induction in the ionosphere. On Earth, this region is home to a ring current that arises from
the plasma sheet brought by the solar wind and the hydrogen ions from the ionosphere, and also contains the
Van Allen radiation belts. For 10 points, identify this region surrounding some planets, which forms from
the interaction of the solar wind with the planetary magnetic field.
ANSWER: planetary magnetosphere [prompt on "magnetic field"]
Dividing the diopter of a lens by four and adding one is a simple way to calculate this quantity. When
prefixed by "bio," this term can refer to the increase in concentration of toxic chemicals as one progresses
up the food chain, such as DDT in bald eagles. For a single lens, this quantity can be calculated as the focal
length divided by the quantity focal length minus object distance. For 10 points, identify this term which
refers the ratio of image size to object size, which colloquially refers to the amount of enlargement of an
image.
ANSWER: magnification [accept word forms such as magnifying]
This term credited to Hipparchus [hih-PAHR-kus] is still used even though his reason for using it was
incorrect. Hipparchus classified objects into six classes, while one of the two modern measurements of this
quantity is based on comparisons to the star Vega. To keep values on the y-axis between negative ten and
positive twenty on a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, astronomers use this quantity instead of luminosity.
Name this quantity whose apparent and absolute values are measures of brightness.
ANSWER: magnitude (accept apparent magnitude or absolute magnitude)
In the MK system, this type of star corresponds to class V. An important characteristic that defines
these stars is chemical homogeneity. One way to determine the distance to a cluster is to vertically fit these
type of stars on a CMD, which gives one the distance modulus. The age of a cluster can be determined by
the age of this type of star at the turnoff point. "Zero age" is the point at which a star evolves from a
protostar into this type of star. On a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, stars on this track proceed along the
diagonal from bottom right to top left in the area of highest density. For 10 points, given this term for stars
that obtain their energy by fusing hydrogen to create helium in their core.
ANSWER: main sequence star [prompt on dwarf star]
In the MK classification, this group is represented by luminosity class V ["five"]. The turnoff point, which
can be used to date clusters, is where a star exits this region. It runs from upper-left to lower-right on the
diagram where it appears, and white dwarfs appear below it. Larger stars spend less time here; the Sun is
expected to remain in this region for a total of ten billion years, after which it will become a red giant. For
10 points, name this diagonal band on the H-R diagram where stars spend most of their lifetime.
ANSWER: main sequence
The Borealis basin covers 40% of this locale, and the geologic history of this astronomical body is
split into three primary epochs, the Noachian, Hesperian, and Amazonian. It is home to the Valles
Marineris, a large canyon, and is the home of the (*) tallest known mountain in the Solar System. This
body's soil was sampled in 2008 by the Phoenix lander, and in 2007, compounds containing water
molecules were found on this planet by the rover Spirit. For ten points, name this celestial body and site of
Olympus Mons, the fourth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Mars
The next NASA probe to visit this body will launch in November 2011 and is named Curiosity. Its highest
point is located just outside the volcanic Tharsis region, and it is home to a large canyon known as Valles
Marineris. The tallest mountain in the Solar System, Olympus Mons, is located on this planet, which is
orbited by two Asaph Hall-discovered moons called Deimos and Phobos. For 10 points, name our Solar
System's 4th planet often known as the "red planet."
ANSWER: Mars
MIMOS II is a Mossbauer spectrometer used for mineralogy on the surface of this body. 5261
Eureka is a trojan of this planet which has the second highest eccentricity after Mercury. A moon of
this planet is thought to be the source of the Kaidun meteorite due to its carbonaceous chondrite
composition. This planet's oldest features, including the Tharsis bulge, formed during its (*) Noachian
period. This planet was explored by the surface rovers Spirit and Opportunity, and Mariner 4 was the first
successful flyby of this planet. This planet is orbited by Phobos and Deimos, and it is home to the giant
volcano Olympus Mons. For 10 points, name this red planet that is between Earth and Jupiter in distance
from the sun.
ANSWER: Mars
A meteorite found on this object was the Heat Shield Rock, and this object's namesake Climate Orbiter was
lost due to a failed translation of English units into metric units. The astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli
[skyah-pah-REL-lee] created a surface map of this object, which is home to an area of volcanic activity
called the Tharsis Ridge. The satellites of this planet were discovered by Asaph Hall, and the color of this
planet is due to the mineral hematite. In 2004, the rovers Spirit and Opportunity landed on this planet,
which is home to the Solar System's tallest mountain, Olympus Mons. For 10 points, name this red planet
whose two moons are Phobos and Deimos.
ANSWER: Mars
The TEGA experiment showed the presence of perchlorates here. The oldest geologic epoch of this
object, the Noachian, included the formation of the oldest surfaces of the object as well as the Tharsis
bulge. Large surface features on this planet include Hellas Plantia and (*) Valles Marineris. Asaph
Hall discovered its satellites, Phobos and Deimos. This planet has the highest volcano in the solar system,
Olympus Mons. For 10 points, name this planet, the 4th from the sun which is notable for its red surface.
ANSWER: Mars
This body is home to regions known as "Barnacle Bill" and "Shark" which contain fine-grained
quartzite minerals similar to andesite. Piqueux theorized that this body's dark "spider" regions were
the result of geyser activity driven by subterranean sublimation of atmospheric gases. This body saw
the formation of many lava plains during its Hesperian Geological Epoch, while its earlier (*)
Noachian epoch is characterized by heavy bombardment. Perchlorate and calcium carbonate were
determined to be present in this body's soil by the Phoenix Mission in 2008, and other explorations of this
body include the two Viking missions. This body's massive plateau, the Tharsis Bulge, is located just west
from the solar system's largest canyon, Valles Marinaris, and famously contains the solar system's tallest
mountain, the volcano Olympus Mons. Recently explored by Spirit and Opportunity, FTP, name this body
orbited by Phobos and Deimos, the fourth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Mars
This planet was first mapped by the Italian Giovanni Schiaparelli. Its plateau of Tharsis is home to
many large volcanoes, and it was once studied by the Viking program. This planet was supposedly
home to (*) "canals." Currently being explored by the Opportunity rover, it is home to the mountain
Olympus Mons. For 10 points, name this planet with the moons Deimos and Phobos, which is known as the
"Red Planet."
ANSWER: Mars
The Swiss Cheese Features are small pits found on this entity. Flooding during its Hesperian Epoch
followed the Noachian Epoch during which it was heavily bombarded. The Borealis basin covers forty
percent of its surface, which was photographed by a namesake Global Surveyor and also contains the
Tharsis region, which is home to many large volcanoes. This body visited by the Phoenix lander is home to
the Valles Marineris and has an atmosphere with 95% carbon dioxide. It is orbited by two moons, Phobos
and Deimos, and has the highest mountain in the solar system, Olympus Mons. For 10 points, identify this
reddish-colored fourth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Mars
Though this planet has no magnetic field, readings from its global surveyor determined that its crust in the
southern hemisphere is magnetized. The 5261, which trails it, is a trojan asteroid. The subject of NASA's
[NA-suhs] Viking missions, it was visited more recently by Spirit and Opportunity. This contains large
canyons called Valles Marineris [VAL-us mar-ih-NAR-is] and the largest volcanic mountain in the solar
system, Olympus Mons. Phobos and Deimos [DEE-mose] are its two moons. Name this red planet visited in
2012 by the rover Curiosity.
ANSWER: Mars
Madler and Beer were the first to select an arbitrary prime meridian for this body, and Ophir and Ganges
are some of the chasmata found here. Hellas Planitia is located in an impact basin on this planet, and the
"seven sisters" caves are located along Arsia Mons, a member of Tharsis Montes, located along the equator
of this planet. Mist sublimates from frost in the Labyrinth of the Night, west of the Valles Marineris, named
for Mariner 9, which visited this planet. For 10 points, name this planet which is home to the tallest
mountain in the solar system, Olympus Mons, the fourth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Mars
This object's north is home to the Arabia Terra region, considered to be one its oldest terrains. An
enormous impact on this object created a feature that covers nearly 40% of its surface, the Borealis Basin.
A continent-size uplifted region in the southern hemisphere of this object is known as the Tharsis bulge.
Giovanni Schiaparelli theorized that there were "canals" on this object. The rover Curiosity is exploring this
object. It is the site of the mountain Olympus Mons and has two moons, Phobos and Deimos. For 10 points,
name this fourth planet from the Sun, known as the "Red Planet."
ANSWER: Mars
The Cydonia region is home to this body's infamous "Face." Giovanni Schiaparelli observed a network of
linear structures on its surface but a mistranslation of his notes led to the belief that it contained canals and
therefore life. The tallest mountain in the Solar System is located on this body in its Tharsis region, and the
Mariner 9 spacecraft, after which this planet's Valles Marineris is named, discovered that its Olympus Mons
is a shield volcano. It is orbited by two moons, Phobos and Deimos, and iron oxide on its surface gives it a
reddish appearance. For 10 points, name this fourth planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Mars
On this celestial object, twisted terrain can be viewed in the Noachis quadrangle, which contains a plain
that is antipodal to the Alba Mons. Thomas Gangale proposed the Darian calendar as a timekeeping system
based on this object. A large volcanic region on this celestial object is known as Tharsis. On this planet,
Chryse Planitia opens into the Borealis basin and was the landing site of Viking 1. Giovanni Schiaparelli
first discovered "canals" on this planet, which was extensively studied by Percival Lowell. In 2008, water
was discovered on this planet by the rover Phoenix. For 10 points, name this planet whose moons are
Phobos and Deimos.
ANSWER: Mars
The first spacecraft to pass by this planet was the Mariner 4, in 1965. In 1975, NASA started the
Viking program, which sent two space probes to this planet. Its two (*) polar ice caps have lead people
to believe that there may have been sentient life on this planet in the past. Some landmarks on this planet
include Valles Marineris, the largest known valley, and Olympus Mons, the highest known mountain. The
two moons of this planet are fittingly named Phobos and Deimos, the Greek equivalents of the sons of its
namesake Roman God of war. For ten points, name the fourth planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Mars
Research by Papathinasiou and Wasserburg in the 1970s demonstrated that the SNC meteorites originated
from this body. The earliest stage of evolution of this body is called the Noachian epoch, and a large
formation on this body has deformed its lithospheric crust to create features like the Argyre basin. Unlike its
nearest neighbor of the same type, this body lacks a dipolar magnetic field, thought the presence of radial
magnetic fields suggest that it may be home to a magma ocean. Its surface is home to the Hellas impact
basin as well as a long trench running 3000 miles from the Noctis Labyrinthus, and the Phoenix mission has
recently confirmed the discovery of water on this body. Home to the Tharsis region, the Valles Marineris,
and the tallest volcano in the solar system, Olympus Mons, for 10 points, identify this planet orbited by
Deimos and Phobos, which is red.
ANSWER: Mars
This planet was studied by Percival Lowell, who helped fuel speculation that there were canals on this
planet. This planet's two moons were discovered days apart by Asaph Hall and are Phobos and Deimos.
The Mariner 9 mission visited this planet and documented its massive volcanoes, like Olympus Mons. It is
being explored by NASA's Curiosity rover. What is this red planet, the fourth from the Sun?
ANSWER: Mars
Some craters on one moon of this planet were named after places and characters from Gulliver's Travels.
This planet's orbit is the second-most eccentric of the planets in our Solar System. The south pole of this
planet contains Swiss cheese features, and the north is dominated by the Borealis basin. Cirrus clouds form
around this planet because of the sublimation of carbon dioxide from its ice caps, causing winds that also
pick up dust and water vapor. This planet's color results from the high iron oxide content on its surface, and
it is currently being explored by the Opportunity and Curiosity rovers. For 10 points, name this fourth
planet of the solar system.
ANSWER: Mars
Recent data suggests that this body has experienced five volcanic events, occurring between 3.5 billion and
100 million years ago. One such eruption likely occurred from the Arsia Mons, a member of the Tharsis
Montes which was named by Giovanni Schiaparelli. A better known feature is a shield volcano 27
kilometers high, whose lava residues were explored by the Express orbiter in 2004 and is the tallest known
mountain in the solar system. For 10 points, name this home to Olympus Mons orbited by Phobos and
Deimos, the fourth planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Mars
This object was the origin of Tissint, which fell in Morocco in July 2011. Its Noachian epoch saw the
formation of the Argyre Planitia, and was followed by the Hesperian and Amazonian epochs. This planet's
northern hemisphere features the Borealis basin, and its equator features the Valles Marineris, the largest
canyon in the solar system. This planet has two polar ice caps, and its color is due to the iron oxide on its
surface. The largest mountain in the solar system, Olympus Mons, is located on this planet. For 10 points,
name this terrestrial planet with moons Phobos and Deimos, the fourth planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Mars
The Hellas Plantia impact basin can be found on this astronomical body, which contains the largest
canyon in the solar system, Valley Marineris. It was once thought that there were canals on this (*)
planet, but they turned out to be optical illusions. Its iron oxide contributes to its color. Phobos and Deimos
are moons of, for 10 points, what home of Olympus Mons called the "red planet"?
ANSWER: Mars
The first of these objects to successfully begin a mission did so on July 20, 1976, 16 days later than
planned. The most northern located of these objects, named Phoenix, began operating in 2008, and
discovered the presence of a perchlorate [per-KLOR-ayt]. One of these objects can be found in an
area named Utopia Planitia [plan-EE-sha], while another made it to the ground using airbags in a
tetrahedral configuration, and is now named for Carl Sagan. The most recent one used a skycrane as
part of its deployment in 2011. Name these spacecrafts, exemplified by the Viking ones, that went to
the Red Planet.
ANSWER: Mars landers [accept similar answers mentioning Mars and the notion of a lander; prompt on Mars probe; do not accept answers including "rover"; accept Viking before "Phoenix"]
A British one of these objects was dubbed the Beagle 2. Viking 1 and 2 were the first devices of this
kind to succeed at their mission, and a pair of them named Spirit and Opportunity was launched in 2004.
The most recent one of these devices successfully transmitted from Aeolis Paulis in 2012, and was named
Curiosity. For ten points, name these devices which may be used to image Olympus Mons and are small
robots sent to the fourth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Mars landers [or Mars probes; or Mars orbiters; or equivalents mentioning Mars and some kind of spacecraft]
One of these bodies has two nearby features named for Swift and Voltaire and a surface covered by
regolith; another has many spots, such as Limtoc, named for characters from Gulliver's Travels. These
objects, which are thought to be made of carbonaceous chondrites, were discovered by Asaph Hall. The
larger of these objects is thought to have suffered a large impact due to 700-meter-wide grooves projecting
out from its massive Stickney crater, and passes over the Valles Marineris by making a full orbit in just
over four hours. For 10 points, name these two irregularly-shaped objects, each a few miles wide, which
orbit a red planet.
ANSWER: moons of Mars [or Phobos and Deimos; or Deimos and Phobos before read]
One of these objects ignored the command "shutdown dammit until," leading to speculation that it
was stuck in a reboot loop. Every one of these objects could instantly deploy an alpha proton x-ray
spectrometer. One of these objects discovered a feature named Home Plate and became stuck in loose
granular material near it. All of these objects were named for winners of (*) student essay
competitions, including one that bears instruments like the CheMin and MARDI. Sojourner was the first
successful one, preceding twin ones named Spirit and Opportunity. A site named for Ray Bradbury was the
landing zone of the most recent one, which arrived in August 2012. For 10 points, name these vehicles, such
as Curiosity, which were built to explore a red planet.
ANSWER: Mars rovers [prompt on rovers]
Material found in "Dodo" and "Goldilocks" confirmed the existence of this substance, which is suggested
by prominent "blue berries." This substance was proposed as the reason that chunks of bright material
disappeared from Phoenix's arm. A mistranslation of Giovanni Schiaparelli convinced 19th century
scientists that canali actually contained this. Rifts in the Valles Marineris may have been created by this
substance, which Opportunity found near Endeavor Crater. Fluvial conglomerates discovered by Curiosity
indicate that this substance once existed far from the poles. For 10 points, name this substance which would
indicate that life could exist on the Red Planet.
ANSWER: water on Mars [or Martian water; or ice on Mars; or H2O]
Two alternatives to the most common explanation for this quantity invoke the Abbott-Farhi model or
technicolor, though better accepted is a tachyon condensation model called the Higgs mechanism.
Special relativity calculates it by dividing the Lorentz factor into the rest version of this, and the
resistance to acceleration under the influence of a given force may be quantified by its inertial type. For
10 points, identify this physical quantity that indicates how much matter an object contains, which in a
famous equation may be converted to energy.
ANSWER: mass
Luminosity is approximately equal to the seven-halves power of this quantity for main-sequence
stars, and negative h bar squared is divided by two times this quantity in the Hamiltonian operator. The
"reduced" form of this quantity is frequently employed in two body problems. The "flow rate"
associated with this quantity in incompressible fluids must be constant according to the continuity
equation, and a form of energy is equal to this quantity multiplied by the square of the speed of light.
For 10 points, identify this quantity commonly measured in grams.
ANSWER: mass
The transfer of this property due to surface tension is known as the Marangoni effect. Wiezsacker's formula
can be used to calculate this quantity for an atomic nucleus. The principle of equivalence maintains that the
inertial and gravitational forms of this quantity are equal. Kinetic energy can be calculated by multiplying
this quantity by velocity squared. Momentum divided by velocity is equal to this quantity, which is
multiplied by acceleration to yield force. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of matter in an
object, which is measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass [prompt on m; do not accept "weight"]
One mechanism for the generation of this property involves the absorption of Nambu-Goldstone
bosons. One of the Millenium Prize Problems is to prove the existence of Yang-Mills theory and a
corresponding gap named for this quantity. This value for an atomic nucleus includes a term
proportional to the binding energy which can be approximated by the semi-empirical formula for it.
One formulation of the equivalence principle in general relativity equates the (*) inertial and
gravitational forms of this property. A two-body problem in mechanics can be turned into a one-body
problem by introducing the reduced version of this quantity. This quantity is related to energy by a factor of
c squared in an equation due to Einstein. For 10 points, name this quantity for which the SI unit is a
kilogram.
ANSWER: mass
Along with the fourth power of charge, this property appears in the numerator of the formula for the
Rydberg constant. One unit used in measurements of this property is the Dalton. A "defect" in this property
is the difference between the observed value and the theoretical value, which is calculated by summing this
property for each proton and neutron. For 10 points, give this property, which for a mole of carbon-12 has a
value of twelve grams.
ANSWER: mass [or atomic mass; accept rest mass of an electron before "Dalton"]
One form of spectroscopy determines the ratio between this property and the charge of a species. The
difference between its calculated unbound amount and the measured amount is its namesake defect,
observed in a nuclear reaction. For an electron, this property is about 1/1800 [one over 1800] that of a
proton and a neutron. Carbon-12 is used as a standard for one measurement of, for 10 points, what property
of substances measured in daltons or grams?
ANSWER: mass [or weight; accept molecular mass; do not accept molar mass]
Integrating the Einstein equation over any volume in three-space, with time constant, gives the Komar
variety of this quantity. In particle physics, a sum of squares including two terms for perpendicular
momenta gives a transverse version of this quantity. In the Standard Model, this quantity can be acquired
from Nambu-Goldstone bosons through the Higgs Mechanism. The square of the escape velocity of an
object is directly proportional to this quantity. According to Newton's second law, this quantity multiplied
by the acceleration equals to the sum of the forces acting on the body. For 10 points, name this quantity that
is measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass
Normal modes may be identified by computing the determinant of the K-matrix minus angular frequency
squared times the matrix named for this quantity. According to the no-hair theorem, a black hole can be
characterized entirely by charge, angular momentum, and this property. In special relativity, the first law of
thermodynamics describes the conservation of this quantity. The equivalence principle states that the
gravitational and inertial forms of it are the same. The motion of gravitating bodies is most easily described
in barycentric coordinates, also known as "center-of-this" coordinates. For 10 points, force is equal to
acceleration times what quantity?
ANSWER: mass [accept mass-energy; prompt on "energy"]
The Chandrashekar Limit gives the upper bound on this quantity of white dwarf stars, and the product of the
rotational analogue of this quantity and angular acceleration yields torque. This quantity appears along with
velocity squared in the equation for kinetic energy. Einstein formulated an equation that equates the product
of this quantity and the square of the speed of light to energy. For 10 points, name this quantity that, when
multiplied by gravity, yields an object's weight and is measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass [do not accept "weight"]
The de Broglie wavelength of a particle is equal to Planck's constant divided by velocity times this
quantity, and an object's kinetic energy equals its momentum squared divided by two times this
quantity. This quantity for sub-atomic particles is often measured in electronvolts divided by the
speed of light squared, which can be derived from (*) Einstein's famous equation.The force of gravity
exerted by two objects is proportional to the product of this quantity for each object, and acceleration times
this quantity equals force, according to Newton's second law. For ten points, identify this quantity measured
in kilograms and symbolized m.
ANSWER: mass (accept linear momentum before "velocity" is said)
This quantity for an atomic nucleus is determined using Weizscker's [VAHYTS-zek-uhrs] formula. The no
hair theorem states black holes are completely characterized by their angular momentum, charge, and this
quantity. The oscillation period of a spring equals two pi times the square root of this quantity over the
spring constant. The theoretical value of this quantity for gluons is zero. Linear momentum equals this
quantity times velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass
In quantum field theories the difference between the vacuum state energy and the next-highest state
energy is this quantity's "gap." In nuclear physics, the binding energy is equivalent to the so-called defect in
this quantity. In the matrix for the seesaw mechanism, both Dirac and Majorana terms for this quantity
exist; that mechanism imparts this quantity to neutrinos. The continuity equation describes the conservation
of this quantity in fluids. The Compton wavelength varies between particles as one over this quantity.
Obtained in the standard model by symmetry breaking of the Higgs field, for 10 points, identify this
quantity which when multiplied by the gravitational acceleration yields the weight.
ANSWER: the mass [prompt on m]
In a semiconductor, one form of this quantity is raised to the three-halves power in order to find
the density of states. Along with spin, this quantity provides the index of unitary irreducible
representations of the Poincare group. A "gap" named for this quantity is the difference in energy
between the vacuum state and the next lowest energy state. The inertial and gravitational forms of
this quantity are equal according to the (*) equivalence principle. The binding energy of a nucleus is
found by calculating the defect in this quantity, and it is multiplied by the gravitational acceleration and
height to find gravitational potential energy. For 10 points, name this quantity which is multiplied by the
square of the speed of light in order to find energy.
ANSWER: mass [or m; accept effective mass or mass gap]
For main-sequence stars, this quantity raised to the 3.5th power gives an approximation for the
luminosity. The Schwarzschild metric describes spacetime around a spherical body with only this
quantity, and the no-hair theorem states that black holes can be characterized by angular momentum,
charge, and this quantity. Gravitational anomalies led Fritz Zwicky to postulate dark matter and account for
"missing" values of it. The standard unit of this quantity in astronomy is the "solar" one, whose value can be
used to find the strength of the sun's gravitational field. For 10 points, give this quantity, which equals a
star's density times its volume, and is often measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass
A "reduced" form of this quantity is used in solving the two-body problem, and a change in this quantity
for problems involving atomic nuclei is known as its namesake "defect" or "deficit." For a rigid body with
uniform density, the centroid is the location of the "center" of this quantity, and adding the prefix "bio" to
this word gives a term for biological material from organisms. Dividing this quantity by volume gives
density. For 10 points, identify this quantity measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass [prompt on m]
Rotational inertia is equal to the integral of the radius squared with respect to this quantity. Kinetic
energy is one half this property times velocity squared. The Super-Kamiokande team found that neutrinos
have this property. This property is equal to momentum divided by velocity and acceleration divided by
force. Einstein said that energy equals this property times the speed of light squared. Weight is this property
times gravity. For 10 points, name this quantity of matter measured in grams.
ANSWER: mass
Tremonti et al. used the results from SDSS to derive the relation named for this quantity and stellar
metallicity. This quantity is related to the velocity dispersion in a different relation named for it and
the Greek letter sigma. Wolf-Rayet stars are defined by their quick changes in this value. The
temperature and density variables were used by Jeans to create an upper bound on this quantity for
a molecular cloud. The (*) lifetime of a main sequence star is proportional to this quantity raised to the
minus 2.5 power, or alternatively this quantity divided by the luminosity. A star possessing a stellar wind is
currently lowering its value for this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity that appears along with the
radius and "big G" in Newton's law of gravitation.
ANSWER: mass
This quantity varies inversely with a particle's Compton wavelength. Two types of this quantity were found
equivalent by Lorand Eotvos [UT-vush] using a torsion balance, a result known as the equivalence
principle. In general relativity, this is responsible for spacetime curvature. Progress was recently made on
how gauge bosons acquire this property-possibly along with leptons and quarks-through the Higgs
mechanism. For two objects, this quantity for each of them is directly proportional to the gravitational force
between them, and this quantity is multiplied by acceleration in Newton's second law. Name this quantity,
often contrasted with weight, that is measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass [prompt on inertia; do not accept or prompt on "weight"]
One formulation of the hierarchy problem asks why the Planck scale for this unit is so anomalously
large. Particles which violate conservation laws for short times are said to be off of the "shell" named
for this quantity. The only scalar in the standard model creates this property via spontaneous
breaking of electroweak symmetry. A major pillar of general relativity is that two different forms of
this quantity are the same; that is the (*) equivalence principle. The Chandrasekhar limit is about 1.4
times the sun's value for this quantity. The potential energy due to gravity is proportional to this quantity for
both objects involved, and force is this quantity times acceleration. For 10 points, name this quantity which
is the amount of stuff something has, measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass
Two definitions of this concept were shown to be equivalent in the Eotvos experiment. Taking on complex
values for tachyons, this quantity is one of three externally observable characteristics of a black hole.
Thought to be conferred through spontaneous symmetry breaking in the Higgs mechanism, this conserved
quantity appears twice in the numerator of the law of universal gravitation. Shown by Albert Einstein to be
equivalent to energy, it can be defined as a measure of inertia or as the amount of matter. For 10 points,
name this quantity measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass [prompt on m; do not accept "weight"]
One statement about this property will be tested with the disturbance-insulated samples of the STEP
satellite. Robert H. Dicke confirmed the accuracy of that statement about this property to 1 in 100 billion,
improving on an earlier experiment in which Lorand Eotvos used a torsion balance to balance two forces
caused by it. That experiment demonstrated the equivalence principle, which states that two types of this
property are identical. Its rest type is often measured in electron volts, leaving off the factor of c squared
between energy and this property. For 10 points, name this property inherent to matter, and gravitational
forces, which can be measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass
The Yukawa interaction for a fermion is proportional to the square of this property of the particle. This
property of a black hole whose Compton wavelength and Schwarzschild radius are equal is named for
Planck. Using units where space and time are equal, the square of this property is equal to e squared minus
p squared. Particles are believed to gain this property through the Higgs boson. The gravitational force
between two objects is proportional to the product of the objects' this. For 10 points, name this quantity that
is multiplied by acceleration to obtain force in Newton's Second Law of Motion, a measure of the amount of
matter in an object often measured in grams.
ANSWER: mass
Every sufficiently large amount of this quantity has an associated Schwarzschild radius. Kepler's
third law of planetary motion assumes that this property for one body is negligible compared to this
quantity for the other body. The weak equivalence principle states that the inertial and (*)
gravitational forms of this property are the same. In special relativity, this quantity is equal to energy
divided by the square of the speed of light. Force equals this quantity times acceleration. For 10 points,
name this quantity that is measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass [do not accept "weight"]
This type of gap is defined as the smallest energy state orthogonal to the vacuum and its existence in
Yang-Mills theory is a Millennium Prize problem. In analogy with a superconductor generating a
surface current to exclude external magnetic flux, spontaneous symmetry breaking to create NambuGoldstone bosons along with the existence of gauge symmetry interact to generate this quantity. That
mechanism is often compared to a (*) cocktail party, in which social interaction represents interaction
with a namesake field. Two forms of this quantity are equated in the equivalence principle, and it is
generated via the Higgs mechanism. In special relativity, an observer moving with an object will observe
the rest form of this. Newton's second law relates, for 10 points, force and what quantity times acceleration?
ANSWER: mass
In the natural unit system, this quantity is equal to the square root of energy squared minus momentum
squared. In a uniform gravitational field, the center of gravity for a linear system of particles is equal to the
sum of this quantity for each particle times their distance from the origin over the total sum of this quantity.
In 2012, CERN claimed to have confirmed the existence of the Higgs Boson or "god particle" that gives
particles this property, which is equal to volume times density. For 10 points, name this quantity that differs
from weight because it does not change depending on environment.
ANSWER: mass
An "effective" form of this quantity used to calculate conductivity in the Drude model is equal to three
times the harmonic mean of three similarly-named values specific to each dimension. Its invariant form is
proportional to the square root of the difference of the squares of energy and momentum times the speed of
light. Some of this quantity is lost when atoms bond, this value's defect. Black holes are completely
categorized by charge, angular momentum, and this quantity. Given by force divided by acceleration, for
10 points, name this measure of an object's inertia, measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass [accept effective mass before "this value"]
This quantity is multiplied by the speed of light in the denominator of the Compton wavelength. The
difference of this quantity's unbound and measured quantities is its "defect." The implied asymptotic
increase of this property with speed makes faster-than-light travel impossible. In general relativity, the
presence of this property causes spacetime to curve. The Higgs boson might impart this property to matter.
Einstein equated it with energy and the speed of light squared. For 10 points, name this quantity which,
when multiplied by acceleration, gives force.
ANSWER: mass [prompt on m; accept rest mass until "faster-than-light"]
The most precise "direct test" of this concept, by Rainville et al., studied gamma rays emitted by
neutron capture in sulfur and silicon. The first experimental verification of this relation occurred in
1932 and was performed using a multistage diode/capacitor voltage multiplier - generally also
considered the first real particle accelerator - invented by Cockcroft and Walton. A relativistic
variant
of this relation is squared and has an additional factor of momentum squared times speed of (*) light
squared on its right-hand side. It is used to derive the binding energy of the atom because summing the
individual particles of an atom leaves a "defect" in another property. For 10 points, name this concept
summarized by the famous equation E equals m c squared.
ANSWER: mass-energy equivalence [or obvious equivalents, such as E equals m c squared until they are read]
The first verification of this principle came from the first human-controlled nuclear
disintegration experiment, in which a lithium atom was split into two alpha particles, which was
performed by Cockcroft and Walton. When converting between "rest" and "total" forms of the
quantities in this principle, an additional factor of momentum times speed of light, all squared,
appears. Due to this principle, particle physicists often use natural units to express particle (*) mass
in terms of giga-electronvolts. This principle was first stated in the 1905 Annus Mirabilis paper that
proposed special relativity. For 10 points, identify this principle proposed by Einstein and demonstrated by
the famous equation E equals m c squared.
ANSWER: mass-energy equivalence [or obvious equivalents, such as that mass and energy are equivalent; or E equals m c squared until it is read]
His 1861 paper On Physical Lines of Force set forth a "spinning cell" model of electromagnetic induction,
and that same year he accidentally showed the world's first color photograph at a Royal Institution lecture.
Other accomplishments include producing a standard for electrical resistance and deducing the particulate
nature of Saturn's rings. His demon tried to violate the second law of thermodynamics, his distribution is
central to statistical mechanics, and his relations equate the second derivatives of thermodynamic potentials.
For 10 points, name the Scottish physicist whose equations unified electricity and magnetism.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
This scientist corrected the isotherm of a van der Waals gas by replacing an oscillating section below the
critical temperature with a horizontal line splitting the curve into two equal areas. The equality of mixed
partial derivatives can be used to derive a set of relations named for this man equating various partials of
thermodynamic quantities. This physicist developed a distribution function describing the velocities of
molecules in ideal gases that is also named for Boltzmann, and he added a displacement current term to
correct Ampere's law. He also conceived of a being that could violate the second law of thermodynamics.
For 10 points, name this British scientist who put together the four fundamental equations of
electromagnetism and has a namesake demon.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
This scientist names a fluid which can be modeled as a dashpot filled with a Newtonian Fluid that is
connected in series to a perfectly elastic spring. He names a method of fixing oscillatory isotherms of
the van der Waals equation by drawing a horizontal line that sweeps out equal areas. His study of
Watt's centrifugal governor was one of the earliest forays into control theory, and he names a
construct which was shown to acquire too much information entropy in its brain to be feasible, a
follow-up to an argument made by Leo Szilard. This physicist added the displacement current term to
one law which related current to magnetic field and published it and 3 others in "On Physical lines of
Force." Those 4 equations include the aforementioned Ampere's law, Faraday's law, and 2 versions of
Gauss's law. FTP, name this physicist who names the set of equations which governs electromagnetism.
ANSWER: James Clerke Maxwell
A device used to calculate inductance using resistance and capacitance is a type of Wheatstone
Bridge named after this scientist, and with Weichert, names a model of viscoelasticity. Rolf Landauer
explored this man's thought experiment involving two chambers of separated gas and a creature
known as his demon. He also names a probability distribution that can be used to model temperature
and atom interaction along with Boltzmann. For ten points, name this Scottish scientist that modified
Ampere's law, one of his 4 namesake Equations.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
Along with a man who names an exponential thermodynamic weighting factor, this man names a
probability distribution for the speeds of gas particles. He proposed a thought experiment in which
particles are sorted based on their temperature. This man predicted the existence of light waves long
before they were observed. His (*) "demon" would violate the second law of thermodynamics. For 10
points, name this man who formalized classical electromagnetism with his four namesake equations.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
This man introduced equations characterizing the stability of governors in an early paper on control theory.
He showed that only particulate composition can confer stability to Saturn's rings, and he also names a gap
in the outer C-ring of Saturn. Experimentally verifiable thermodynamic quantities are used to relate hard-tomeasure thermodynamic functions according to a set of relations named for this man. He introduced the
displacement current term in another equation, which, along with the Faraday's law and the two Gauss laws
were discussed in this man's paper "On the Physical Lines of Force." For 10 points, identify this thinker
who grouped a set of four equations from electrodynamics.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
This scientist proposed a "sea of molecular vortices" in which light propagates, beginning the
search for the luminiferous ether. This man discovered that the product of permittivity and
permeability is one over the speed of light squared, which led him to conclude that light was an (+)
electromagnetic wave, a conclusion Marconi would later use to develop the radio. He added a term
proportional to the time rate of change of (*) electric flux, called the displacement current, to Ampere's
Law, which he then grouped with Gauss's Laws and Faraday's Law. For 10 points, name this Scottish
physicist whose four equations describe electromagnetism.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
This scientist names a series of partial derivatives of thermodynamic quantities, known as his relations.
Along with Boltzmann, he names a statistical velocity distribution for gas molecules. He imagined
decreasing the entropy of a gas, separating the fast moving particles through a door managed by his
namesake demon. He also added a correction to Ampere's law for changing magnetic fields, and showed
that light is an electromagnetic wave. For 10 points, name this English physicist who names four equations
of classical electrodynamics.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
In order to make a magnetic field more nearly constant, this scientist added coils to a Helmholtz coil.
Using symmetry arguments, he reached the same conclusion Ludwig Boltzmann did using degrees of
freedom with statistical mechanics, finding the distribution of molecule speeds in a gas; the resulting
statistics are named for both of them. This person added a displacement current to improve on
Ampere's law, and he devised a thought experiment to question the limits of the second law of
thermodynamics, which is called his "demon". Name this scientist who combined his revision of
Ampere's law with Faraday's law and two of Gauss's laws to summarize electromagnetism through
four namesake equations.
ANSWER: James Clerk ["Clark"] Maxwell
This man devised the fish-eye lens and a variant of the Wheatstone bridge that can be used to
calculate an unknown inductance. He used a dashpot connected in series with a spring in his
namesake model of linear viscoelasticity, and his namesake unit equaling 10-8 (*) weber is the cgs unit
of magnetic flux. In a letter to Peter Tait he investigated the second law of thermodynamics using a thought
experiment involving a door between two chambers that can be raised and lowered by his namesake demon.
FTP, name this man who introduced the displacement current term in Ampere's law as part of his work
unifying electricity and magnetism.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
This scientist's development of the "three-color" theory was used by Thomas Sutton to take one of the
first color photographs. In 1859, he proposed that Saturn's rings were made of many independent particles
of matter. He developed a set of namesake relations between the partial derivatives of thermodynamic
quantities, and he proposed a thought experiment in which the second law of thermodynamics is violated
by his namesake "demon." For ten points, name this Scottish physicist who created 4 equations of
electromagnetism.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
This man conceived of a creature that could open a trap door through which only fast-moving particles
could enter; that creature, supposedly contradicting the Second Law of Thermodynamics, is his "demon."
Oliver Heaviside formulated the current form of his most famous work; his main contribution to that work
was the addition of a displacement current to Ampere's Law. For 10 points, name this Scottish physicist
who derived four namesake equations that describe electromagnetism.
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
A viscous fluid and an elastic spring connected in series characterizes this scientist's namesake model
of viscoelasticity. Equating the second mixed partial derivatives of each of the four thermodynamic
potentials is the derivation of the set of fundamental thermodynamic equations named for this
scientist. This scientist proposed a thought experiment in which high velocity (*) gas particles
accumulate selectively on one side of a divided container, violating the 2nd law of thermodynamics. This
man names another set of equations that can be used to derive the wave equation for an electromagnetic
wave. For 10 points, Gauss's laws, Faraday's law, and Ampere's law are the 4 fundamental equations of
electromagnetism named for what scientist, who also theorized a namesake "demon"?
ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell
Finch used this to model the diffuse reflection of X-rays by crystal lattices, while Galwey and Brown
object to the overzealous application of the Arrhenius equation to solid-state reactions because it
cannot always apply. The Dulong-Petit fails at low temperatures because of a reliance on it, while
the Rayleigh-Jeans law incorrectly assumed that it extended to (*) blackbody radiation. The Sackur-
Tetrode equation applies precisely when its eponymous statistics do, which are the limit of Fermi-Dirac and
Bose-Einstein statistics at high temperature or low concentration. Mathematically, it describes the length of
a three-vector with components are normally distributed around zero. FTP, identify this doubly-eponymous
probability distribution, most often applied to the speeds of a large number of frequently colliding, noninteracting particles.
ANSWER: Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
This mathematical entity can be derived as the attractive fixed point of the collisional analogue of the
Vlasov equation; application of Jeans- theorem to that equation, which is named for a sometime namesake
of this object itself, directly yields its dependence on energy over kinetic temperature. The sum of this pdf
over all states forms the partition function and its value at those states forms its namesake factors. For 10
points, name this probability distribution that gives the speed distribution of particles in a canonical
ensemble, such as a contained ideal gas.
ANSWER: the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution [accept either underlined part or Maxwellian distribution; prompt on N]
Landauer's treatment of this concept suggested that the Shannon theorem was inadequate in explaining it.
This concept was first proposed in a letter to Peter Tait by its namesake. It was first refuted by Leo Szilard
and Leon Brillouin, who noted that the energy required for memory storage and to operate it would negate
its purpose. Its setup includes an insulated barrier and a small door between two chambers that is operated
by a being who separates particles into fast and slow moving compartments. For 10 points, identify this
thought experiment of its namesake Scottish physicist that violates the Second Law of Thermodynamics by
means of an impish figure.
ANSWER: Maxwell's demon [accept equivalents]
This construct can exist if mirror matter exists, and some versions of in include the Somluchowski
Trapdoor and the Ranque-Hilsch vortex tube. Landauer and Bennett showed that this construct
would have to eventually erase the data that it had collected, and in a criticism of the formulation of
this, Leo Szilard noted that taking a measurement would actually require expending energy.
Classically, the relative difference in temperature between both parts of this device would increase, and the
overall entropy would decrease. For 10 points identify this violator of the second law of thermodynamics
who is able to separate particles into different chambers by their speed, a thought experiment named for a
Scottish physicist.
ANSWER: Maxwell's Demon
Raizen, Muga, and Ruschhaupt's "single-photon cooling" is the closest it is possible to get to this
entity, and Rolf Landauer's refutation of this idea argues that information cannot be stored
indefinitely, leading him to the conclusion reached earlier by Leo Szilard. The most famous disproof
of it claims that it would have to (*) expend energy to measure speeds and sort particles, preventing
entropy from decreasing. For ten points, identify this physics thought experiment in which the Second Law
of Thermodynamics would be violated by its namesake creature.
ANSWER: Maxwell's Demon
Henry Adams compared militant Germany to this thought experiment. Leo Szilard noted that it has to have
some way of acquiring and storing information, thereby refuting its formulator's claims. The Brownian
ratchet is similar to this thought experiment, but Richard Feynman proved that it cannot actually produce
useful work because the mechanism will not work under the theorized conditions. The title entity controls a
gate between two gas chambers and is able to cause a temperature difference, thus causing a decrease in
entropy. For 10 points, name this thought experiment formulated by a Scottish physicist, which seems to
defy the second law of thermodynamics.
ANSWER: Maxwell's demon
The solution to this paradox which presaged the modern idea of information as physical reality by several
decades occurred in 1929, when it was posited that the increase in information collected every time the oneway gate essential for this gedanken experiment opened and closed exactly balanced the decrease in gas
entropy. In this way, a major physical law was "rescued" from an "intelligent being with deft hands" first
described fifty-eight years earlier. Capable of being created for real using cryogenic techniques, for 10
points name this creature dispelled by Leo Szilard, one invented by a namesake Scottish physicist in 1871.
ANSWER: Maxwell's Demon_
The Ranque-Hilsch vortex tube uses centrifugal force to produce the same effect as this system. Szilard and
Brillouin challenged this concept, arguing that the act of processing information requires energy. In its
original formulation, it consisted of two joined containers full of gas particles, which would be allowed to
pass from one container to another based on their speed, resulting in a large temperature difference between
the two containers. Proposed to challenge the Second Law of Thermodynamics, for 10 points, name this
thought experiment named after a Scottish physicist also known for his work in electromagnetism.
ANSWER: Maxwell's demon
They are found alongside the mathematical form of the Lorentz force law in the paper in which they
appear, On Physical Lines of Force. A consequence of one of them is that no magnetic monopoles
exist, and their formulator added a correction for the (*) displacement current to the original version of
another. A third describes the flux through an imaginary "Gaussian surface", and Faraday's Law describes
how changing magnetic fields induce electric fields. For ten points, name this collection of electromagnetic
laws, named for a Scottish physicist.
ANSWER: Maxwell's Equations
They can be applied to curved space-time by replacing derivatives with covariant derivatives, and if
magnetic monopoles were found to exist, they could be combined and written singly. One of them relates
the integrated magnetic field around a closed loop to the electric current passing through the loop, while
another was separately but contemporaneously discovered by Michael Faraday and Joseph Henry. Name the
set of four partial differential equations that relate the electric and magnetic fields to their sources, charge
density, and current density.
ANSWER: Maxwell's equations
For the class of functions to which these statements apply in n independent variables, there exist n
squared minus n all over two generalized ones of these. The generalized form of these equations may
be found by invoking Clairaut's theorem to equate mixed partial derivatives of a potential with
respect to its natural variables. The ones of these derived from the internal energy, enthalpy,
Helmholtz function and Gibbs function are respectively (*) volume partial of temperature equals minus
pressure partial of entropy, pressure partial of temperature equals entropy partial of volume, volume partial
of entropy equals pressure partial of temperature and pressure partial of entropy equals minus temperature
partial of volume. For 10 points, name this set of four PDE's that give the relationships among different
thermodynamic variables, named for a Scottish scientist known for his four laws of electromagnetism.
ANSWER: the Maxwell relations
This set of statements was compiled Oliver Heaviside and these statements allowed for the discovery
that the inverse of the square root of the product of the permittivity and permeability constants of
free space was equal to the speed of light. The electromagnetic wave equation can be derived from
these statements and one of these statements is used to determine the magnetic field created by a [*]
current and includes a namesake displacement correction. Two are named after a German mathematician,
one after Faraday, and one after Ampere. For 10 points, name this set of partial differential equations
including Gauss's Law, codified by a Scottish scientist.
ANSWER: Maxwell's Equations
Spectrum hardening causes this quantity to change with distance. When particles have a Maxwell
distribution, the formula for this quantity contains a coefficient of the square root of 2 divided by 2,
and in a gamma-ray source this quantity is the reciprocal of the attenuation coefficient. The Knudsen
number is equal to this value divided by a characteristic length. Commonly used to estimate a
molecule's size, it is naively defined as one over the cross-sectional area times the number of particles.
Directly proportional to temperature and inversely proportional to diameter, for 10 points, name this value
useful in the kinetic theory of gases, the average length which a particle can travel without hitting
something.
ANSWER: Mean free path
The formalization of this process relied heavily on evidence from the Compton-Simon experiment.
Decoherence has been used to describe one result of this process, which causes non-unitary evolution
of the state, as the state is projected onto one of the real eigenvectors forming the basis of the applied
operator; the operator corresponding to this process must be self-adjoint or Hermitian. In the
double-slit experiment, the interference pattern (*) disappears when it is performed at the slits. This
process results in wave-function collapse. Because their observables do not commute, one cannot do this for
position and momentum simultaneously by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. For 10 points, name this
process which for length might be done by a ruler.
ANSWER: measurement [or word forms, like measuring things]
According to Neumark's theorem, one of these realizable actions can always be constructed for a given
positive value operator. The resolution of the consistency problem associated with this action(*) requires
that it be irreversible. Repeating this process very frequently results in a "freezing" of the system state, a
phenomenon known as the quantum Zeno effect. Mathematically, this process can be thought of as the
forced projection of the system state onto an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian, and according to the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle, this process cannot be performed simultaneously with arbitrary accuracy for non-
commuting observables. For 10 points, identify this action which in von Neumann's formalism of quantum
mechanics results in the collapse of the wave function to an energy eigenstate.
ANSWER: measurement or observation [accept experiment before *]
It was first observed in 1933 by its eponymous discoverers in tin and lead specimens. Rather than a
sharp boundary at the edge of the sample, there is a gradual decay of the magnetic field across the
penetration depth of the material. This is caused by persistent (*) currents which form on the surface of
the material as it is cooled below the critical temperature, which completely cancel out the flux inside it,
resulting in perfect diamagnetism. It allows the diamagnetic levitation of small items, including live frogs.
FTP, name this uniquely defining property of superconductors, a phenomenon characterized by the
complete expulsion of a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Meissner-Ochsenfeld effect
A dual version of this effect was proven to occur in N equals 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theories
by Seiberg and Witten, and that effect was postulated to explain why chromoelectric fields in QCD
create stringlike structures. This effect can be explained by an equation that sets j sub s equal to the
number density of carriers times the fundamental charge divided by mc, all times the vector
potential, though usually that equation is expressed in terms of the curl and the derivative of the
supercurrent density in two separate equations. This effect is the result of a state in which the susceptibility
is equal to exactly negative 1, and the explanation of this effect was one of the triumphs of BCS theory. For
10 points, name this effect in which a superconductor expels all external magnetic fields.
ANSWER: Meissner Effect
J.E. Hirsch of UCSD has proposed that, much like the Quantum Hall effect, a "spin" variety of this effect
exists. One proposed explanation for the incomplete type of this effect is the Mendelssohn sponge. In
certain geometries, such as hollow cylinders, this effect can result in flux pinning, and the successful
prediction of this effect is one of the triumphs of BCS theory, though it does not explain its type II variety.
On a macroscopic level, this effect can be described using the London equation, which give the penetration
depth when combined with Ampere's Law. Resulting from the behavior of a perfect diamagnet, for ten
points, identify this physical effect in which a superconductor expels magnetic fields from its interior.
ANSWER: Meissner-Ochsenfeld effect
This physicist discovered an effect which causes the ejection of an electron from an atom when an inner
shell vacancy is filled; that effect is named for Pierre Auger. The Leibniz Medal was awarded to this
physicist for the discovery of a long-lived isotope of protactinium. This physicist used Einstein's E = mc2
to explain the conversion of rest mass into kinetic energy when barium and krypton were formed from
uranium. Although Otto Hahn claimed that he was responsible for the discovery of fission, he was unable to
explain it without the aid of this physicist, his partner. While Hahn won a Nobel Prize, she did not. Identify
this female physicist who discovered nuclear fission.
ANSWER: Lise Meitner
Pershin and Di Ventra proposed that this device can work based entirely on the electron-spin degree of
freedom. Tungsten oxide was used in this device in a 1990 article describing its possible use in electronic
neuron networks. The graph of its IV characteristics was described to look like "pinched hysteresis loops"
by the scientist who defined it as a two-terminal element in which the magnetic flux is a function of the
amount of electric charge passing through it. In the current version of this device two layers of titanium
oxide are used, one of which contains TiO2-x instead of TiO2. For 10 points, identify this device postulated
by Leon Chua which is able to change and maintain its namesake value based on the current and voltage
across it, the fourth fundamental circuit element.
ANSWER: memristors
So, et al. developed one of these devices that uses PAA and PEI-doped agarose hydrogels. These
components can be combined into cross-bar latches. At high frequencies, these components- pinched
hysteresis curves will degenerate into linear IV relationships. An example of these devices uses
oxygen vacancies as charge carriers. The first of these devices was originally created by separating a
platinum electrode and a titanium electrode, then placing a two-layer (*) titanium dioxide film between
them; that example of these devices was originally developed at HP labs. These devices have a magnetic
flux proportional to the amount of charge moving across their two terminals. For 10 points, name these
circuit elements first theorized by Leon Chua, which maintains its opposition to current based on the history
of current flowing across it.
ANSWER: memristor
This planet's "Weird Terrain" is hypothesized to have formed due to shock waves that rippled
through it following the impact that created its Caloris basin. Like Earth, it has a molten core that
creates a weak magnetic field. Now that Pluto is not a (*) planet, this planet has the most eccentric orbit,
and other than Venus, it is the only planet without a natural satellite. For 10 points, name this nearest planet
to the Sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
Its geological period is divided into eras such as Mansurian and Kuiperian and in 2013, the BepiColombo
mission will be launched to study it. A meteoric impact is likely responsible for it's Weird Terrain, which is
near a crater filled with lava known as the Caloris Basin. Due to a liquid metal dynamo at its core, this body
possesses a weak magnetic field that is only 1% the strength of the Earth's. Perturbations in the orbit of this
planet supported Einstein's theory of relativity and the MESSENGER spacecraft recently made a flyby of it.
For 10 points, name this smallest planet that is also closest to the sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
Although not the Moon, the surface of an object with this name features lobate scarps. That object is
also home to the "Weird Terrain," which lies antipodal to the Caloris Basin. When bonded to sulfur, a metal
of this name forms cinnabar. MESSENGER mapped that object with this name. The element with this
name is a silvery liquid at room temperature, which led to its use in thermometers, despite its toxicity. For
10 points, name the object that is closest to the Sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
This body has relatively large and widely distributed networks of thrust faults from the pre-Tolstojan called
lobate scarps, which are exemplified by the Beagle Rupes. This body's hollows are believed to be the result
of surprisingly active processes. Sodium and potassium are found concentrated in its exosphere near its
poles. It is home to a hilly area called the "Weird Terrain" and to the large Caloris Basin. Its iron core takes
up relatively more of its interior than Earth's. This planet has a 3:2 rotational to orbital resonance, one of
the reasons it has the greatest difference between high and low surface temperatures in the solar system. For
10 points, name this nearest planet to the sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
The fact that this body's perihelion precesses around the sun at an excess of 43 arcseconds per century was
explained by the general theory of relativity. The space weathering on this body's surface is a result of
trapped solar wind plasma from its magnetosphere which has about 1% of the strength of Earth's. It was
visited by Mariner 10 in 1976 and again in 2008 by Messenger. With temperatures of 100 Kelvin at night
and 700 Kelvin during the day, it also has the greatest temperature variation of all planets because it lacks
any substantial atmosphere. For ten points, name this planet which revolves once around the Sun every 88
Earth days, the nearest planet to the Sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
In order to complement the lunar crater naming system, all of the craters on this planet are named after
nonscientific authors, composers, or artists. This planet has a 2:3 rotation to revolution ratio, meaning that
its day is longer than its year. It is scheduled to be visited in 2020 by a joint European/Japanese mission
named BepiColombo, while a hilly region known as the "Weird Terrain" is located antipodal to its Caloris
Basin. The main goal of NASA's MESSENGER mission is to study this planet from orbit and to continue
Mariner 10's mapping of its surface. For 10 points, identify this planet named for the Roman messenger
god, the closest to the Sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
The BepiColombo craft will test one hypothesis about the formation of this body. That
hypothesis has to account for the fact that this body's core is unusually iron-rich, which explains
its dipolar magnetic field. A ring of lava eruption remnants surrounds the Caloris basin on this
structure, which lies antipodal to a patch of "weird terrain". Mariner 10 performed a flyboy of
this body, which is currently orbited by the MESSENGER probe. This body has the largest
orbital eccentricity and smallest tilt of all objects in its class, and it rotates three times for every
two revolutions. The perihelion shift of this object by around 40 arcseconds per year matches the
predictions of general relativity. For 10 points, name this planet, the closest to the sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
This body's "Weird Terrain" may have been formed concurrently with its Caloris Basin. In 2022, this body
will be orbited by BepiColombo, which will research its iron-rich core and its magnetic field first detected
by Mariner 10. This body's orbital eccentricity is the highest of any planet, while its perihelion precesses an
extra 43 arcseconds than predicted by Newtonian mechanics. Its day is longer than its year and it
experiences the most temperature variation of any planet, since its thin atmosphere has been largely blown
away by solar wind. The smallest planet in the solar system, for 10 points, name this planet closest to the
Sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
BepiColombo is scheduled to visit it in 2019. MESSENGER is currently making flybys around this planet,
which has a weak atmosphere that contains sodium and potassium. Before MESSENGER, only Mariner 10
had visited it, and it may contain a liquid iron core that produces the second-strongest magnetic field within
the asteroid belt. A theory that said a planet named Vulcan lied within its orbit was discredited after general
relativity was used to explain its precession at perihelion. Its day and year are locked into a 2:3 ratio, and
the largest crater on it is Caloris Basin. For 10 points, name this smallest planet, the closest to the sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
Among the features of this body are the Caloris Basin, and the Borealis Quadrangle contains its Goethe
Basin. At one point, this body was the subject of some confusion which led to the eventual discovery of
the star 31 Crateris. A mission hoping to learn about its magnetic field is being launched by the European
Space Agency and titled BepiColombo. Examination of this body have led to an unstable outer layer known
as an "exosphere" and researchers using a VLA in 1991 found evidence to support the existence of thin ice
caps. With a rotational period of 59 days, this body was the subject of the Mariner 10 mission and sees the
largest temperature variation in the solar system. FTP, identify this planet that was the subject of the
appropriately named MESSENGER spacecraft, the closest planet to the sun.
ANSWER: Mercury
Most of them are pseudoscalars, and the heaviest is a vector. One set of neutral ones require a small
correction for charge-parity violation, and they were originally believed to be carriers of the strong
force. Their flavorless varieties are known quarkonia, which include the J-Psi, or charmonium.
Examples of these particles that exist outside of the quark model include glueballs and tetraquarks
and (*) Hideki Yukawa won the Nobel Prize for predicting these. Named for the heavier of the two quarks
in their composition, FTP, name these strongly interacting hadronic bosons whose name comes from the
Greek word for middle.
ANSWER: Mesons
The X(3872) particle discovered in the BELLE experiment has been theorized to be an exotic variety of this
type of particle, as is the glueball hypothesized to consist of gluons only. An experiment conducted by
Frisch and colleagues used a thick iron cylinder to capture one example of these particles in a proof of time
dilation. A subclass of this particle that is always flavorless is quarkonium, which consists of a single type
of particle, and these particles must be colorless. The simplest ones have zero spin and form a nonet that
includes the flavorless nu and pi. A more famous member is K, which led to the uncovering of CP violation.
Unlike baryons, they consist of an even number of quarks. For 10 points, give this name for hadrons with
integer spin which are composed of a particle and its antiparticle.
ANSWER: meson
Most of these particles are pseudoscalars and have 0 spin and negative parity. The decay of one of these
resulted in the Tau particles and the Theta particles, which had identical masses but opposite parities, thus
leading to CP violation. The most famous one of these was independently discovered by Richter and Ting,
and is called the "charmonium" or the "J-psi" particle. For 10 points, identify these particles which are
made of a quark-antiquark pair, and whose name comes from Greek for "middle."
ANSWER: meson
One of these particles is electrically neutral and decays into an electron-positron pair and a photon in
the Dalitz decay. Another type of these particles was discovered by Rochester and Butler after the
analysis of certain 'V' events. The unusual decay of one of these particles was called the tau theta
puzzle, and experiments to study them by Cronin and Fitch was the first evidence for CP violation. The
muon was wrongly classified as one of these particles, whose existence was proposed by Hideki Yukawa,
and they are bosons with integer spins. For 10 points, name these particles composed of a quark-anti-quark
pair, exemplified by the j/psi particle and pions and kaons.
ANSWER: mesons [prompt on bosons; accept pions until "Rochester"]
The quantum Zeno effect occurs when a quantum system in this type of state is measured frequently,
causing it to remain in that state. This type of state is the operating basis for the bubble chamber, since the
superheated liquid hydrogen used in those devices represents one realization of this kind of state.
Techniques such as optical pumping are used to create population inversions in which electrons are placed
into these types of states, from which they undergo a lasing cascade. This term characterizes the output of
an element such as a flip-flop before it has settled following a transition, and a mechanical example of this
type of state is a ball sitting on top of a hill which will roll down the hill if disturbed. For ten points, identify
this type of state in which a system is in equilibrium but may easily transition to a lower energy state under
any perturbation.
ANSWER: meta-stable [accept word forms]
Very bright examples of these are known as superbolides, including the one associated with the island of
Sulawesi seen in 2009. Many of these are classified as chondrites or pallasites depending on their
composition and whether little round pieces are found within them. These can cause shatter cones, and the
Alvarez hypothesis claims that one of these caused the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event that killed all
the dinosaurs. These are the objects in the Perseid and Leonid showers. Name these objects that can appear
as shooting stars when they enter Earth's atmosphere.
ANSWER: meteor (accept meteorite or asteroid)
In 1946, Bernard Lovell used one of the first radio telescopes to determine the size of one of these events,
whose most atypical example is linked to the break up of 3200 Phaethon. One of these events named for St.
Cyril was unique because it had no radiant, while the two best known ones were caused by objects called
Tempel-Tuttle and Swift-Tuttle. The magnitude of these events can be assessed in terms of zenithal hourly
rate, and many of these events produce clouds of ionized silicon and magnesium in the upper atmosphere.
Caused by the Earth passing through the debris stream of a comet, and including the Leonid in November
and Perseid in August, identify these events in which many rocks enter the atmosphere at the same time,
creating numerous bright streaks across the night sky.
ANSWER: meteor shower
Clues about the conditions of the early Solar System can be gleaned from calcium-aluminum-rich
inclusions in these objects. Chondrites constitute the majority of these objects found on Earth. Amino
acids were found on the Murchison example of these objects. One of these found in (*) Antarctica was
believed to have microscopic fossils of Martian bacteria. For 10 points, name these objects that survive the
fall to Earth from outer space and can be the remnants of shooting stars.
ANSWER: meteorites
In 1960, this SI unit was redefined using an orange line in the spectrum of krypton-86. It is the ratio of one
Joule to one Newton, and when squared, it is the ratio of one Newton to one Pascal. It was originally
defined using a platinum rod, then a platinum-iridium bar in Paris, but its most recent definition is
dependent on the speed of light. For 10 points, give this base unit used in measurements of periods,
wavelengths, and distances, the SI unit of length.
ANSWER: meter
The inverse of this SI unit is the unit of the Rydberg constant, the wavenumber, and the power of a lens
as measured in diopters. From 1960 to 1983 the value of this unit was determined by krypton-86 radiation;
since then, it has been defined in terms of the speed of light. Units that are powers of ten of this SI unit
include the angstrom and the micron. For 10 points, name this SI unit of length.
ANSWER: meter
Cool T dwarfs like Gliese 229b have spectra that when compared to L dwarfs are dominated by this
molecule. This non-diatomic molecule can be produced as a result of serpentinization. The surface of
Makemake is thought to be covered by deposits of this molecule. Low levels of this molecule have
been detected by orbiters on Mars but those detections have been challenged by the failure of (*)
Curiosity to detect this molecule. This molecule is responsible for Neptune's blue coloration. This molecule
is primarily made biotically on Earth and it is thought that this molecule rains down into lakes on Titan. For
10 points, name this molecule with formula CH4.
ANSWER: methane [or CH4 before mentioned]
The parameters describing the parallel transport of a vector on a manifold, Christoffel symbols, are obtained
by taking derivatives of this quantity. In the Einstein field equations, this quantity multiplies both the scalar
curvature and the cosmological constants on the left-hand side. In special relativity, this quantity is
represented by a 4-by-4matrix with no off-diagonal elements whose first diagonal value has opposite sign
from the other three, since it represents a time-like quantity; in that case, this quantity is named for
Minkowski. In Euclidean space, this quantity is equivalent to the Kronecker delta, which means that
distances can be calculated through the generalized Pythagorean theorem. For 10 points, identify this
quantity which, for a given space, provides a way to calculate the distance between two points.
ANSWER: metric tensor [accept Christoffel symbols until the first syllable of "Christoffel" is about to be read]
The Sagnac effect was discovered in an experiment which built upon this experiment and disproved the
"ballistic theory." One experiment very similar to it used varying lengths of an object to show that the time
difference is constant, thus falsifying the Fitzgerald-Lorentz hypothesis. The apparatus used in it was placed
on a marble slab which was rotated in mercury to allow for all orientations of a certain "wind" to equally
affect the outcome, and one of its namesakes developed the interferometer used in this experiment. For 10
points, identify this experiment, which showed no change in the velocity of light due to ether drift, and thus
debunked the theory of the luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: the Michelson-Morley experiment
The Trouton-Noble experiment attempted to replicate the result of this experiment using by studying the
rotation of a charged capacitor. The Kennedy-Thorndike experiment modified it by eliminating anisotropies
caused by earth's rotation, while Brillet and Hall conducted this experiment in vacuum. Its setup included a
mirror placed at 45 degrees, and no interference patterns were observed at the detector. For 10 points,
identify this doubly-eponymous experiment which disproved the theory of luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
Dayton Miller attempted to improve this experiment by eliminating magnetic fields and using a laboratory
with thin walls, and this became the basis of the Kennedy-Thorndike experiment. This experiment
originally was conducted on a block of sandstone floating in a pool of mercury. Worked on in 1887 in
Cleveland, the rotating apparatus later became known as an interferometer and used a semi-silvered mirror
to split a beam of light. Scientific historians debate whether or not this experiment played a role in the
development of special relativity. Name this experiment that failed
to find evidence of a luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
The Shankland team supported the outcome of this experiment by finding fundamental flaws in Daisy
Miller's observations. A version of this experiment looking for seasonal variation was carried out by
Kennedy and Thorndike. It used a half-silvered mirror to split coherent light and attempted to detect a
certain "wind" by measuring fringe shift with an interferometer. Its results were explained by the
Lorenz-FitzGerald hypothesis concerning length contraction. For 10 points, what experiment, named for
two physicists at Case Western, disproved the existence of luminiferous (loo-min-IF-er-us) aether (EEther)?
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
The Fitzgerald-Lorentz hypothesis was falsified, and the Sagnac Effect was discovered in two experiments
that built upon this experiment. The main apparatus was placed on a large marble block that was then
floated in a pool of mercury. This experiment began when a single source of white light was sent out
through a half-silvered mirror that was used to split the light into two beams travelling at right angles to one
another. Conducted at what is now Case Western Reserve University was, for 10 points, what doublyeponymous experiment that disproved the idea of luminiferous ether?
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley Experiment
One of the confirmations of this experiment was performed by Gustaf Wilhelm Hammar in Idaho after this
was brought into question by experiments performed by Dayton Miller on top of Mount Wilson. Originally
moved from Berlin to Potsdam because of vibrations, this experiment eventually was conducted on a stone
slab floating in a pool of mercury in Cleveland. Its null result was explained at first by drag but is now
explained by relativity. Name this attempt to measure the luminiferous ether [loo-meh-NIH-fuh-rus EEthur].
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
This experiment partially contradicted the earlier Hoek (WHO-K) experiment, the results of
which had been explained by a dragging coefficient. An early version of this experiment observed a
shift of 0.018 fringes. This experiment was modified with an asymmetrical apparatus in the (*)
Kennedy-Thorndike experiment. This experiment's apparatus was designed around a half-silvered mirror
and perpendicular arms, and rested upon a pool of mercury which rotated. For 10 points, name this
experiment conducted at Case Western that disproved the existence of the luminiferous aether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
A pool of mercury in a basement provided a nearly frictionless and vibration-free environment for rotating
this experiment's apparatus. This experiment found a fringe shift of nearly zero, instead of the expected
four-tenths of a fringe. The interference pattern discrepancy indicated that the speed of light did not vary
with direction in this experiment, which used an interferometer named for one of its experimenters. For 10
points, name this experiment in which two scientists disproved the existence of luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment [accept names in either order]
Recent replications of this experiment were completed by Brillet and Halle, and by Charles Townes
using two ammonia masers on a rotating table. The "ballistic theory" explains the results of it, and a
Wheatstone bridge was used to perform a version of it by Trouton and Noble. (*) Lorentz argued that
the transversal time calculated in this experiment were incorrect, and this had doubles the expected results
up to .04 fringes. Using an interferometer, for ten points, name thisdoubly eponymous experiment,
performed at Case Western University, which disproved the existence of the luminiferous aether and
showed that the speed of light is constant in all directions.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
As a modification to this experiment, two massive lead blocks were added in the Hammar
experiment, and Dayton Miller's results from repeating this experiment were found anomalous. Its
results were confirmed by another experiment in which parallel plate capacitors failed to orient
themselves perpendicularly to the direction of motion. FitzGerald and Lorentz proposed that length
contraction could explain its results, which showed the lack of any interference fringes, indicating that the
speed of light was constant. For 10 points, identify this experiment which provided evidence against the
theory of a luminiferous aether, conducted by two American physicists.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
Used as evidence for the special theory of relativity, it involved looking for fringes of light separated
by dark stripes. In order to maximize the shift, the experiment was repeated, increasing the length of the
beams by repeated reflections. In it, a beam of light was split by a reflecting mirror into two perpendicular
beams, then reflected back to the source and recombined. The apparatus was rotated in such a way that the
interference pattern would have changed if the light was traveling through ether, but this proved not to be
the case. For ten points, name this experiment, which used an interferometer.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment (accept Morley-Michelson)
This experiment was replicated with erroneous results by Dayton Miller. This experiment was
replicated with a self-orienting capacitor by Trouton and Noble, and its central device was shortened
in the Kennedy-Thorndike experiment. The Lorentz-Fitzgerald contraction sought to explain the
results of this experiment, in which [*] light was split with a half-silvered mirror. This experiment proved
that the speed of light does not depend on the viewer's movement through space. Utilizing an interferometer
at Case Western was, for 10 points, what doubly named experiment that disproved the existence of the
luminiferous ether?
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley Experiment
This experiment was intended to provide data useful in a future experiment to test Charles Sanders
Peirce's hypothesis that the wavelength of an atomic spectral line could be used as a standard unit of length.
One of the experimenters suggested using a sandstone-and-mercury support for its critical device after a
previous attempt had failed in Potsdam. A follow-up to this experiment used that device to detect variations
due to the Earth's rotation; that experiment by Kennedy and Thordike also failed to observe a fringe shift of
0.4 as expected. That device used in this experiment included two mirrors and a half-silvered glass plate
and is known as one namesake's interferometer. For 10 points, name this 1887 experiment that failed to
prove the existence of a stationary ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
One follow-up to this experiment concerned the realignment of a parallel-plate capacitor at the Earth's
surface. Unlike that related Trouton-Noble experiment, this experiment utilized a device consisting of two
perpendicular arms with a beam-splitter located at the intersection, designed to produce different fringe
interference patterns dependent on the path of light. Its results suggested that the propagation of light does
not change with direction, shown with the use of an interferometer. For 10 points, name this doublyeponymous 1887 experiment that helped disprove the idea of the luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
Dayton Miller's attempt to recreate this experiment was unsuccessful, possibly because he did not control
for temperature gradients. It was carried out in the basement of a stone building on top of a stone apparatus,
using a pool of mercury to reduce vibration. A variation performed later by Kennedy and Thorndike
required time dilation in addition to the length contraction used to explain this experiment whose results
were further verified by the Ives-Stilwell experiment. It was performed in 1887 at Western Reserve
University, and its results led to the development of Lorentz transformations. The people who carried it out
did not correctly interpret its negative result. Name this experiment which attempted to use an
interferometer to find the luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
An experiment with similar results to it was later conducted by Trouton and Noble. Lorentz argued
that the negative result of this experiment was caused by length contraction. This experiment used
two mirrors and a (*) beamsplitter, one of its namesake's interferometer. The fringe shift ended up being
within the margin of error, meaning that the earth's movement relative to the substance in question did not
appear to exist. For 10 points, name this experiment named for two scientists that was used to disprove the
existence of ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
This experiment occurred thirteen years before Lord Kelvin gave a speech describing black body
radiation and this experiment's subject as two "clouds" obscuring physics. This experiment's results
led Hendrik Lorentz to develop his idea of length contraction. This experiment made use of a device
that could detect the difference in arrival time for a beam of light being split and reflected. That
device was an (*) interferometer. For 10 points, name this nineteenth century experiment that failed in its
attempt to prove the existence of the luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
The Kennedy-Thorndike experiment modified this one by shortening one arm of the original apparatus, and
the Trouton-Noble experiment was its electrostatic analogue. In it, length contraction canceled out the drift
of one of two arms of the apparatus, providing evidence for the Fitzgerald-Lorentz hypothesis, and the
apparatus used in it was placed in a mercury bath in order to allow for all orientations of a certain 'wind-.
That apparatus was an interferometer, named after one of the experimenters.. For ten points, name this 1887
experiment which disproved the existence of a luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
The results of this experimentwere confirmed by the Trouton-Noble experiment. One participant
in this experiment continued to work with Dayton Miller in an attempt to achieve a different result,
while the result in this experiment was a failure to detect any significant fringe shift after light passed
through an (*) interferometer. Such a shift would have provided evidence for a medium in which light
travels, a theory which was therefore debunked by this experiment. For 10 points, name this experiment
that disproved the existence of the luminiferous aether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
The results of this experiment were supported by the absence of a realignment in the parallel-plate capacitor
used the Trouton-Noble Experiment. The apparatus used in this experiment was rotated atop a stone slab
within a mercury pool and made use of a 45 degree mirror that split light into two separate beams. Carried
out at present day Case Western Reserve University with the aid of an interferometer, for 10 points, name
this doubly-eponymous 1887 experiment that disproved the existence of luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
Varying the lengths of an object used in it showed that T1 minus T2 is independent of Lorentz
contraction in an experiment performed by Kennedy and Thorndike. Its setup was rotated to ensure
that all orientations of the substance under consideration would affect the system equally, and it
involved a half silvered mirror which partially reflected light whose differential travel time would result
in an interference pattern on the detector. For 10 points, identify this experiment performed by two
American scientists, which did not find any trace of the luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
Recent performances of it included one using cryogenic optical resonators and another performed by
Charles Townes using a maser. The development of the Fizeau-Foucalt apparatus occurred before this
experiment was performed but did not provide accurate enough measurements. Its results would lead to the
development of the Lorentz-Fitzgerald contraction and the data was collected by observing interference
fringes. The experiment consisted of a device with a light source, a silver glass and two mirrors and
attempted to show that light moved at different speeds in different directions. FTP, identify this 1887
experiment that used an interferometer and would ultimately disprove the existence of luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
The Kennedy-Thorndike experiment modified this experiment by changing the distances used. This
experiment used a mercury pool to allow for easy rotation as well as a silver mirror that could (+)
split light beams into two. This experiment saw negligible difference between the time taken for two
perpendicular light beams to return to the light source and used the (*) interferometer. For 10 points,
name this experiment, which disproved the existence of luminiferous ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
The Shankland team supported the outcome of this experiment by finding fundamental flaws in Daisy
Miller's observations. A version of this experiment looking for seasonal variation was carried out by
Kennedy and Thorndike. It used a half-silvered mirror to split coherent light and attempted to detect a
certain "wind" by measuring fringe shift with an interferometer. Its results were explained by the
Lorenz-FitzGerald hypothesis concerning length contraction. For 10 points, what experiment, named for
two physicists at Case Western, disproved the existence of luminiferous (loo-min-IF-er-us) aether (EEther)?
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
A modification of this experiment led to the discovery of the Sagnac effect, and it had the same result as an
experiment in which a capacitor was suspended by a wire. The results of this experiment led to the
development of the Lorentz-FitzGerald contraction hypothesis. It used a device that separates a beam of
light into two. That namesake interferometer floated in mercury. A significant fringe shift was not observed
in this experiment, which set out to measure the velocity of the earth relative to the substance that supports
the propagation of light. For 10 points, name this doubly-eponymous experiment performed in 1887 that
disproved the existence of ether.
ANSWER: Michelson-Morley experiment
A type of these devices developed by Binnig, Quate, and Gerber measures the deflection of a
cantilever to determine "atomic force." A criticism of the Copenhagen interpretation is named for
one of these devices and Werner Heisenberg. The coiner of the term (+) "animalcule"
(aa-neh-MALK-yool), Anton van Leeuwenhoek (LAY-von-hoke), worked with these devices. Today,
those using (*) electrons come in "scanning" and "transmission" types. For 10 points, name these devices
which magnify images.
ANSWER: microscopes
Karl Jansky's discovery of a radio source in this galaxy led to the foundation of radio astronomy. This
galaxy obscures the area known as the Zone of Avoidance. The local shear and vorticity of rotation of this
galaxy are constants characterized by Oort. The Large and Small Magellanic Clouds orbit this galaxy. In
2010, the Fermi Telescope discovered two gamma-ray-emitting bubbles that extend out-of-plane from this
galaxy's center, which is an intense radio source called Sagittarius A* (A-star). For 10 points, identify this
barred spiral galaxy, found in the Local Group, that is home to the Solar System.
ANSWER: Milky Way
A cloud contained in it is known as "Chain A." The tentatively-named Virgo Stellar Stream lies
perpendicular to one extension of it, and the 14 surviving dwarf companions of it orbit within its dark
matter halo. The cluster RSGC1 is located in its Scutum-Crux Arm, which itself is found between the
Sagittarius and Norma Arms. The Monoceros ring has been proposed to encircle it, and it's the most
notable thing in the Local Group. Containing the Large Magellanic Cloud, for 10 points, name this galaxy,
home of the Solar System.
ANSWER: Milky Way [prompt on "The Galaxy"]
The Gould Belt is a partial ring of objects within this entity, and its center is visible through
"Baade's window." This object interferes with astronomical observation in the so-called zone of
avoidance. This object in the Virgo Supercluster is predicted to collide with Andromeda in three
billion years. The center of this object is the home of Sagittarius A-Star, a large radio source that
may be a supermassive black hole. For 10 points, name this barred spiral galaxy in the local
group that contains the solar system.
ANSWER: the Milky Way galaxy
This entity's notable features include Gould's Belt and the great rift. It causes the zone of avoidance
because of its concentrated dust. At its center is the radio emitting (*) Sagittarius A-star. It includes the
Scutum-Crux, Perseus, and Orion arms. It has a halo full of globular clusters and a flattened disk. Near this
object is the Large Magellanic cloud. In three billion years this barred spiral will collide with its neighbor,
Andromeda. For 10 points, name this galaxy that is home to Earth.
ANSWER: the Milky Way Galaxy
The central bulge of this astronomical body is clearly visible through the Baade's Window, and this
astronomical body is orbited by the large and small Magellanic Clouds. This body obscures the night sky in
a region referred to as the "zone of avoidance." The supermassive black hole Sagittarius A* ["A-star"] is
located at the center of this galaxy, and the Andromeda is the closest galaxy to this body, which is a member
of the Local Group. For 10 points, name this spiral galaxy home to the solar system and planets such as the
Earth.
ANSWER: The Milky Way Galaxy
The Monoceros ring and the Virgo Overdensity are around the outskirts this astronomical entity,
which is the location of the Gould belt. RR Lyrae stars were used by Harold Shapely to estimate the
size of this entity, which contain both Tycho's and Kepler's supernova remnants. Omega Centauri orbits
this entity, whose centre is a radio source called Sagittarius A-Star. This galaxy, whose satellites include the
large and small Magellanic Clouds and whose arms include the Perseus and Orion, will collide with M31,
its nearest spiral neighbour, in a few billion years; that neighbour is the Andromeda Galaxy. For ten points,
name this barred-spiral galaxy that you are currently sitting in.
ANSWER: Milky Way Galaxy
Objects near the center of this structure are subject to the "paradox of youth." Bertil Lindblad attempted to
explain the dynamics of this structure. It is the nearest object to which the Lin-Shu density wave theory
applies. The center of this structure is visible through Baade's Window. The portion of the sky obscured by
this structure is called the Zone of Avoidance. The massive radio source called Sagittarius A-Star is located
in the center of this structure, which is a member of the Local Group that will eventually collide with
Andromeda. For 10 points, name this spiral galaxy in which you currently reside.
ANSWER: the Milky Way Galaxy
In 2003, a satellite of this object, "Complex H," was discovered to have a retrograde orbit, and in
2006, University of California at Berkeley researchers found that a "warp" in this object is vibrating with
three modes. Its center is inhabited by the supermassive black hole candidate Sagittarius A* ("a star").
The Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy is its nearest neighbor, and it also interacts with the nearby Large and
Small Magellanic Clouds. For 10 points, name this galaxy, which contains the only planet known to
support life, Earth.
ANSWER: Milky Way Galaxy
In 2001, Goodstein published an analysis of this experiment's work and showed that its result would not
have changed if all of the data points had been used. Subject of a 1978 analysis by Holton, it is believed that
the omission of certain data was to avoid giving ammunition to Felix Ehrenhaft when Franklin examined the
data in 1981; Ehrenhaft himself used a small condenser and calculated a similar result as this experiment.
Carried out with its namesake's graduate student Harry Fletcher, it carried out its calculation by balancing
gravitational forces with upward forces on particles suspended between parallel voltage plates. FTP, name
this 1909 experiment that sought to measure the charge of the electron.
ANSWER: Millikan's oil drop experiment [all parts required, prompt on partial answer]
Felix Ehrenhaft wrote several articles that attempted to discredit the measurements of this experiment,
whose main source of error was the value used for air viscosity. This experiment was performed by the man
who verified the photoelectric effect and Harvey Fletcher. Electric and gravitational forces were balanced in
order to keep the namesake substance stationary in this experiment, which obtained a value of 1.6 x 10 ^ -19
coulombs. For 10 points, name this experiment performed by Robert Millikan that calculated the charge of
an electron.
ANSWER: oil-drop experiment
This experiment's initial calculation incorrectly accounted for the viscosity of the air, and part of this
experiment's apparatus was a plate with four holes cut for lighting and viewing. This experiment was
conducted alongside Harvey Fletcher, and the result of this experiment was achieved by balancing the force
of gravity and the electric force of the central material. As a result of this experiment a value of a little less
than 1.6 times ten to the negative nineteen was calculated. For 10 points, name this 1909 experiment which
measured the charge of the electron and was performed by Robert Millikan.
ANSWER: oil-drop experiment [accept Millikan experiment early]
This experiment's results were deemed fraudulent by Gerard Holton; current measurements that
put its results off by about one percent mean that its calculations were five standard deviations off.
Its setup involved two parallel metal plates through which an (*) electric field could be created and
turned on and off rapidly, allowing isolation and measure of terminal velocity. From there, Stokes' Law was
used to figure out the weight. For 10 points, name this experiment that measured the charge of an electron.
ANSWER: Millikan oil drop experiment [or Millikan experiment]
The results of this experiment were slightly off due to the viscosity of air, and it used a microscope
pointing through a hole in an insulating ring as a detection apparatus. This experiment used an
atomizer to spray into a chamber containing a uniform magnetic field, and discovered that the (*)
charge occurred in multiples of one point five nine times 10 to the negative nineteenth. For 10 points, name
this experiment performed by an American physicist, which determined the charge of the electron.
ANSWER: Millikan's Oil Drop Experiment
This experiment explored a quantity that may be obtained from the isospin plus half the strangeness plus
half the baryon number. The friction from spraying from a rubber bulb, through the triboelectric effect, or
else the direct use of an x-ray tube, allowed the experimenter to cause motion to reverse after the
eponymous entities reached terminal velocity. The buoyant force in this setup is proportional to velocity
with coefficient 6 pi nu a. It was an error in nu, the viscosity of the air, that put the original trial two percent
off the true value, corrected only by x-ray diffraction studies. Whether employing glycerine or even
mercury, this experiment always generates integer multiples of the same value. FTP, identify this
experiment which suspended the namesake entities in an electric field in order to measure the charge of the
electron.
ANSWER: Millikan oil drop experiment
The results of this experiment were challenged by Felix Ehrenhaft. Preliminary results of the
experiment were published in a paper correcting Stokes- Law. Louis Begeman, J. Y. Lee, and Harvey
Fletcher all contributed to this experiment, whose results were published in the article "On the
Elementary Electric Charge and the Avogadro Number." For 10 points, name this experiment performed
by Robert Millikan, who measured the rate of fall of the namesake substance, the first experiment to
conclusively measure the charge on the electron.
ANSWER: oil drop experiment [or Millikan experiment before mention]
Johnson's shot noise experiment had the same goal as this experiment, which used X-rays to ionize a gap
that contained air as a dielectric. This experiment used three spacer balls to separate the plates of its
capacitor, which usually reached a potential of about three thousand volts. The fundamental technique of
this experiment was to balance the force of gravity with the forces of buoyancy and viscosity, but its result
was off by about six percent due mostly to an incorrect value used for the viscosity of air. Name this 1909
experiment to measure the fundamental charge of an electron, conducted by Robert Millikan.
ANSWER: oil-drop experiment [accept Millikan experiment before the end]
Gerald Holton discovered that seven observations in this experiment had been discarded despite giving a
result within two-percent of the correct one, and Ehrenhaft performed it earlier, obtaining the quantity 2.9
times 10 to the minus 11 esu as a result. This experiment used a modified form of Stokes- law to calculate
drag, and its results were likely undervalued by one-percent due to air viscosity. The setup used parallel
plates to produce an electric field balancing gravity, while an atomizer to produce the namesake material
similar to a perfume spray. For 10 points, name this 1909 experiment conducted by Millikan that calculated
the charge of an electron.
ANSWER: Millikan-Fletcher oil-drop experiment [prompt on "Millikan"]
Felix Ehrenhaft challenged the original results of this experiment. Despite strong skepticism, one
performer of this experiment would also later prove Einstein's photoelectric effect. It relied on the terminal
velocity of a particle suspended in air, though the results of this experiment were off because of an incorrect
value for the viscosity of air. The experiment consisted of the namesake substance suspended in air in the
presence of a uniform electric field. For 10 points, name this 1909 experiment, in which Robert Millikan
determined the elementary charge of an electron.
ANSWER: Fletcher-Millikan oil-drop experiment [or Millikan before it is read]
The results of this experiment were disputed by Felix Ehrenhaft, who claimed to have gotten values
that were a fraction of the minimum possible value. Since the scale of this experiment was on a very
small level, Stokes' Law was invalid, which meant that the pressure had to be adjusted in order to
find the effect of the viscosity of air. However, an error resulted in the final value to be off by about
one percent. It used two (*) charged parallel metal plates, creating a potential difference, which was then
adjusted such that the electric force perfectly counteracted the force of gravity on the titular substance. For
10 points, name this experiment that resulted in the discovery of the charge of the electron.
ANSWER: Millikan Oil Drop Experiment [or Millikan Experiment]
The original result of this experiment was incorrect because the wrong value for the viscosity of air
was used for Stokes' law, which was applied after calculating the terminal velocity of the particles
involved in this experiment. In the second part of this experiment, the air in a chamber was ionized
with x-rays. This experiment involved (*) balancing the gravitational and electric forces on namesake
particles created by an atomizer. For 10 points, identify this experiment that determined the charge of the
electron and was performed by Robert Millikan.
ANSWER: Fletcher-Millikan oil-drop experiment [accept Millikan's experiment before "Millikan" is read]
In 1981, Allan Franklin recalculated the results of this experiment using data points which had
originally not been published, obtaining similar results but with greater statistical error. This
experiment involved using Stokes- law to calculate drag, which could only take place after terminal
(*) velocity had been calculated. Its result departed from the correct value due to the use of an incorrect
value for the viscosity of air. Harvey Fletcher was part of this experiment, which involved two parallel
plates which produced an electric field to counteract the force of gravity so that the namesake substance
could be suspended. For 10 points, name this 1909 experiment which calculated the charge of the electron,
performed by Robert Millikan.
ANSWER: Millikan oil drop experiment
Allan Franklin reinterpreted this experiment's data in response to accusations of selective result reporting by
Gerard Horton, and it was also questioned by Felix Ehrenhaft. One of its performers later verified
Einstein's theory of the photoelectric effect, and its results were low by about one percent due to an
incorrect value for the viscosity of air. Parallel voltage plates created a uniform electric field and the
voltage was adjusted to the level necessary to cause the particle to suspend in air. For 10 points, name this
1909 experiment which measured the charge of the electron, performed by Robert Millikan.
ANSWER: the Fletcher-Millikan oil-drop experiment [accept Millikan before it is read]
The bottom chamber in this experiment was targeted by x-rays to ionize air. Stokes' law was invoked to
calculate the drag force, and the original error of about two percent was largely due to an incorrect value for
the viscosity of air. By employing variable voltage parallel plates, its results could theoretically be
determined by setting qE equal to weight when particles were suspended in air. For 10 points, identify this
experiment, which found that 1.6 times 10 to the minus 19 Coulombs was the charge of an electron.
ANSWER: Fletcher-Milliken oil-drop experiment [accept either]
Its apparatus contained two chambers: one with an atomizer and a small hole in the bottom, and one that
included ionizing radiation, a light source, and a viewing microscope. The original error of about two
percent from this experiment was largely due to an incorrect value for the viscosity of air. By setting weight
equal to q times E, the results were determined when particles suspended in air when a certain voltage was
applied to parallel plates. For 10 points, identify this experiment, which found that 1.6 times 10 to the minus
19 Coulombs was the charge of an electron.
ANSWER: Milliken oil drop experiment (accept either)
Allan Franklin and Gerald Holton argued over the statistical validity of this experiment, and a modified
version of Stoke's Law was used to calculate drag in this experiment. The results of this experiment were
somewhat inaccurate due to an incorrect value for the viscosity of air. Parallel voltage plates formed a
uniform electric field in order to provide enough buoyant force for the particles in this experiment to resist
gravity. For 10 points, name this experiment, conducted in 1909, that accurately measured the elementary
charge of an electron, in which the namesake particles were suspended in air.
ANSWER: Millikan's Oil Drop Experiment [or Millikan's Experiment or Oil Drop Experiment o Fletcher-Millikan Oil Drop Experiment]
With Smith and Siegel, this figure names a formula for summing the weights of lattices in a genus, and his
namesake addition for two sets of points in Euclidean space adds every element of each set pairwise. He
developed a function that maps quadratic irrationals to rationals on the unit interval, and for Lp spaces his
namesake inequality says that the p-norm of f plus g is equal to or less than the p-norm of f plus the p-norm
of g. His namesake diagrams are used for visualizing two observers moving relative to each other, while
another construct named for him contains one timelike dimension, and Lorentz transformations preserve
distances in it. FTP, name this Russian whose namesake space is used to formulate special relativity.
ANSWER: Hermann Minkowski
. A rotating one of these was used in Fizeau's experiments on the speed of light. Justus von Liebig
improved these items by inventing a process for making them involving the deposition of silver. Two of
them made of speculum metal were used in a telescope constructed in 1668 by Isaac Newton, while two
parallel ones mounted at a 45-degree angle are found in a periscope. For 10 points, name these reflective
objects.
ANSWER: mirrors [or looking-glasses]
One quantity with this name has units of length raised to the 4th power and is calculated with respect
to the location of the centroid--that quantity is sometimes called this quantity's "polar" or "area"
version. Diagonalizing this rank-2 tensor yields the three values of it which appear in Euler's
equations; those values are termed "principal." For small oscillations, the period of a physical
pendulum is proportional to the (*) square root of this quantity. This quantity is defined as the volume
integral of r squared times dm ("dee em"), and if it is known for one axis, it can be simply calculated for
any parallel axis by the parallel axis theorem. Equal to the ratio of torque to angular acceleration by the
rotational Newton's 2nd law, for 10 points, name this quantity symbolized I, the rotational analogue of
mass.
ANSWER: moment of inertia [or rotational inertia, prompt on "I," prompt on "inertia," before "area," accept "second moment of area," prompt on just "moment" until "tensor"]
Diagonalization of this rank 2 tensor quantity splits it into three principal components. The values of the
axes of Poinsot's ellipsoid are proportional to this quantity, which is equal to the square of the radius of
gyration multiplied by the cross-sectional area. For solid objects, it can be directly calculated by integrating
the differential mass times distance from the axis of rotation squared throughout the volume of the object. If
this quantity is known at the center of mass, it can be calculated at another axis using the parallel axis
theorem. For 10 points, name this quantity, the rotational analogue of mass, usually symbolized with a
capital I.
ANSWER: moment of inertia [accept rotational inertia, angular mass, mass moment of inertia, do not prompt on "moment"]
The off-diagonal elements of a tensor generalizing this quantity can be used to find symmetries of an object
and are called "products" of a quantity related to this one. This quantity is equal to the integral of r squared
with respect to a differential mass element. Its value about an arbitrary axis differs from that about a centerof-mass axis by the product of the mass and the square of distance between the axes, according to the
parallel axis theorem. This quantity equals the ratio between torque and angular acceleration, and angular
momentum equals this quantity times angular velocity. For 10 points, name this rotational analogue of mass,
a body's resistance to rotation.
ANSWER: moment of inertia
The sum of the squares of the semimajor axes of a body is needed to find this quantity, according to
Routh's rule. The angular kinetic energy can be found by multiplying this quantity by one-half the
square of the angular velocity. The Huygens-Steiner theorem can be used to determine this quantity
for a given (*) axis if this quantity is known for another axis. That theorem is also known as the parallel
axis theorem. The product of this quantity and angular acceleration is torque. For ten points, name this
measure of the tendency of an object to resist change in its rotation, commonly symbolized by a capital I.
ANSWER: moment of inertia (or rotational inertia; or I before mention)
One theorem states that this quantity with respect to a line normal to a given plane is equal to the
sum of it with respect to two perpendicular lines on that plane. This quantity for a solid sphere is
equal to two-fifths times mass times radius-squared. The Huygens-Steiner theorem states that this
quantity about a certain line is equal to it at the center plus mass times distances squared, and is
sometimes called the (*) parallel-axis theorem. Rotational kinetic energy is equal to one-half times this
quantity times angular velocity squared, and this quantity times mass is equal to angular momentum. For ten
points, identify this rotational analogue of mass, a measure of a body's resistance to changes in its rotation.
ANSWER: moment of inertia
The deflection of a cantilevered beam is directly proportional to the load and length, and inversely
proportional to Young's modulus and this quantity. A difference of two of these quantities appears in
Euler's equations of motion, and these quantities are coefficients in the definition of Poinsot's ellipsoid. If
an object is deformed around its axis of rotation, then by the stretch rule, this quantity will not change. If an
object is not rotating about its center of mass, this quantity can still easily be calculated with the addition of
an mr2 term by the parallel axis theorem. Name this quantity, equal to torque divided by angular
acceleration, which is the rotational analogue of mass.
ANSWER: moment of inertia [do not accept or prompt on "inertia"]
Routh's rule is used to calculate this property for complex bodies, where the sum of the squares of the
semimajor axes is divided by an arbitrary constant. When the axis of rotation does not pass through
a body's center of mass, it can be calculated via Steiner's theorem, and it is obtained by mass density
times the integral over the volume of the object the square of the distance from a point to the rotation
axis with respect to volume. FTP, identify this rotational analog of mass which is commonly denoted
by the letter I.
ANSWER: mass Moment of inertia
If one knows this value for a principal axis, one can use Steiner's theorem to calculate it for a parallel
axis. The discrete form of this quantity is the sum of the product of mass with distance from the principal
axis squared. Commonly derived values for this quantity include two-fifths m r-squared for spheres and
one-half m r-squared for disks and cylinders. For 10 points, name this rotational analogue of mass.
ANSWER: moment of inertia
The tennis racket theorem describes an asymmetric instability that arises when this quantity's
principal components are all distinct. The diagonalization of this quantity yields three values which
define the axes of Poinsot's ellipsoid. Its scalar form can be calculated as the integral of r-squared
dm, and it is unchanged when the object is stretched parallel to the (*) axis of rotation. Given its value
at the center of mass, it can be calculated for the same object about a parallel axis. This quantity equals
torque divided by angular acceleration, as well as angular momentum divided by angular velocity. For 10
points, name this quantity symbolized I, the rotational analog of mass.
ANSWER: mass moment of inertia [or rotational inertia; prompt on "moment"; do not prompt on "inertia" ]
The stretch rule states that this quantity does not change when an object is distorted along its axis of
rotation. The tensor for this quantity is symmetric, and is diagonal in some orientation, defining an object's
principal axes. If this value is given for one axis of rotation it can be found for certain others using the (*)
parallel axis theorem. It is calculated by summing or integrating mass times distance from an axis squared,
and rotational kinetic energy is equal to this quantity times the square of the angular velocity. For 10 points,
identify this quantity, the rotational analog of mass, which often has units of kilograms times meters
squared, symbolized I.
ANSWER: moment of inertia
This quantity can be found by using the stretch rule and the perpendicular axis theorem. If one knows
this quantity for an object, it can be found for another object with an axis parallel to that of the known
object by the parallel axis theorem. In general it is found by integrating from 0 to the mass over the radius
squared times a differential mass. Thus,for a solid sphere, it is equal to two-fifths times mass times the
radius squared. For 10 points, name this rotational analogue of mass.
ANSWER: moment of inertia
This quantity can be expressed as a tensor with the off-diagonal elements proportional to the products of
two distances which generally need to be integrated to cover a body. If a body lies in a plane, the sum of
these values with respect to the axes in that plane equals this value with respect to the third axis. This value
can be calculated about a different axis in the parallel axis theorem, and for a solid sphere about a diameter,
it has a coefficient of two-fifths. In general, this value is calculated by summing mass times radius squared
for a body. Name this rotational analogue of mass, commonly represented by a capital I.
ANSWER: first mass moment of inertia [accept rotational inertia or angular mass or rotational mass before "rotational analogue"; prompt on capital I before the end; do not accept or prompt on "mass" or "inertia"]
This property's invariance for objects deformed along an axis is governed by the stretch rule. This
property's value at the center of mass is used with the square of perpendicular distance to determine it at
other points via the parallel axis theorem. Found by integrating the distance from the axis of rotation
squared times the mass density, it is equal to torque divided by angular momentum squared. Symbolized I,
for 10 points, identify this rotational analogue of mass, which determines how much an object resists
changes in its rotation.
ANSWER: mass moment of inertia
The length of the three axes of Poinsot's ellipsoid is equal to half of the three values obtained by
diagonalizaing the tensor representing this quantity. Those three values, known as principle ones of these,
also appear on the left hand side of the Euler equation. Two of the three principle ones are equal in the case
of a symmetrical top, and all three are equal for a spherical top. The parallel axis theorem can be used to
find one of these along a different axis, and in general, it is equal to the integral of the radius squared times
the differential mass element. FTP what is this quantity, the rotational analog of mass?
ANSWER: moment of inertia
In its tensor form, this can be defined through a 3x3 matrix where its elements off of the principle diagonal
are called "products". By putting the tensor into reduced row-echelon form, the principal type of this can be
determined from the values of the principle diagonal. For the scalar form, the Huygens-Steiner theorem
allows for it to be calculated for a rigid object with a displaced axis of rotation, and is also known as the
parallel axis theorem. For 10 points, name this principle that was first defined by Euler in 1730, the
rotational analog of mass.
ANSWER: Mass Moment of inertia
The tensor analog of this quantity can be diagonalized by defining a coordinate system along the principal
axes, and its middle eigenvalue corresponds to unstable motion according to Euler's Equations of Motion.
The deflection of a cantilevered beam is inversely proportional to Young's modulus and this quantity. It is
given by "cross-sectional area times the square of the radius of gyration", and it can be found by the parallel
axis theorem. For a sphere it is equal to "two-fifths m r squared", while it has half the value for a disc that it
has for a ring. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized "I", the rotational analog of mass.
ANSWER: mass moment of inertia [prompt on angular mass]
The second time derivative of this quantity is included in the formulation of the virial theorem, and
another rule governing this quantity specifies that it is unchanged in its namesake reconfiguration, the
stretch rule. This quantity can also be determined via the parallel axis theorem, and for a cylindrical shell is
defined as mass times radius squared. For 10 points, name this physical property, the measure of an object's
resistance to alterations in its rotation.
ANSWER: moment of inertia (do not accept "inertia")
This quantity can be calculated for rigid bodies by taking this quantity around a central axis and
then adding the term mass times radius squared, a process known as the parallel axis theorem. In its
simplest definition, this quantity can be found by integrating the square of distance between an
object's center of mass and the axis of rotation in terms of the object's mass. The time derivative of this
quantity is torque and for a sphere, this quantity is equal to two fifths mass times radius squared.
Symbolized I, for 10 points, name this physical quantity which describes an object's resistance to changes in
its angular momentum, the rotational analogue of mass.
ANSWER: moment of inertia
The area type of this, also known as the second type, has units of length to the fourth power for twodimensional shapes. When this is calculated for objects in the xy-plane, its value with respect to the z-axis is
the sum of the values with respect to the x- and y-axes. That rule is one version of the Huygens-Steiner
theorem used to find this value for an axis not through the center of mass; that law is also known as the
parallel axis theorem. In general, this can be found by adding mass times distance from the axis squared for
each part of an object. Name this rotational analogue of mass, commonly represented with a capital I.
ANSWER: mass moment of inertia [or rotational inertia or polar moment of inertia of mass; prompt on angular mass or rotational mass]
Taking the set of each principal axis divided by the square root of its value for this quantity yields an
ellipsoid. Steiner's theorem, also known as the parallel axis theorem, finds this quantity if it is known about
an axis running through the center of mass. This quantity is equal to the sum of the product of each point
mass with the square of its distance from the axis of rotation. It multiplies angular acceleration to give
torque. For 10 points, name this rotational analogue of mass.
ANSWER: moment of inertia [or I; prompt on inertia]
This quantity can be easily recalculated by including a term for the product of the mass of an object
and the square of the distance involved. It is the subject of Steiner's theorem, also known as the (*)
parallel axis theorem. One way to find this quantity is to integrate the square of a radius from an axis with
respect to mass, and two-fifths of the product of mass and radius squared will yield it for a sphere. The
product of this quantity and rotational velocity yields angular momentum. For 10 points, name this
rotational analogue of mass.
ANSWER: moment of inertia [prompt on inertia; prompt on angular mass; prompt on rotational mass]
The values of this property along certain lines are the semi-major axes of the Poinsot ellipse; the
colatitude partial derivative of this quantity is zero along those lines, which are known as geometric
principle axes. For planar translations, this property transforms by Steiner's theorem, which can be
derived directly when one considers this quantity as a contravariant rank-two symmetric tensor. Its
magnitude is equal to an object's area of gyration times its mass. For 10 points, identify the material
property that is equal to the integral over a body of distance from an axis with respect to mass, is
symbolized I, and is the rotational analogue of mass.
ANSWER: mass moment of inertia [prompt on I before it's mentioned]
The precession rate of a gyroscope is equal to Mgr over the product of omega and this quantity, and the
term M times h-squared is added to this quantity at the center of mass when using the parallel-axis theorem.
Formulas for this quantity are derived from the integral of radius squared with respect to mass. The product
of angular velocity and this quantity is equal to angular momentum, and the product of angular acceleration
and this quantity is equal to torque. For 10 points, name this angular analogue of mass.
ANSWER: Rotational Inertia [accept Moment of Inertia]
In special relativity this quantity's four-vector includes an "energy over the speed of light" term, and
the time derivative of its expectation appears in the common form of Ehrenfest's theorem. The fact that
this quantity does not commute with position gives rise to Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. Newton's
Second Law gives force as equal to the time derivative of this quantity, and it is conserved in both
inelastic and elastic collisions. For 10 points, name this quantity whose change is equal to impulse and
which is equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum
Noether's theorem shows that this quantity is conserved when the Lagrangian of a system possesses
translational invariance, and its quantum mechanical operator is equal to negative i h-bar times the gradient
operator. The de Broglie wavelength is inversely proportional to it, and the derivative of this quantity with
respect to time is force. Impulse equals the change in this quantity, which is conserved by all collisions of a
closed system. For 10 points, name this quantity often symbolized as p, the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: Linear Momentum
This quantity's eigenfunctions are complex exponentials with a constant factor of one divided by quantity
"2 pi times h-bar" all raised to the three-halves power. In Planck units, this quantity is given by the square
root of h-bar times speed of light cubed divided by the universal gravitational constant. The time derivative
of its expected value appears on one side of Ehrenfest's theorem. This quantity is squared in the quantum
operator for kinetic energy; its own operator is equal to h-bar divided by i times the gradient. For massless
particles, special relativity gives this quantity as energy divided by the speed of light. If position is precisely
known, this quantity cannot be according to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. For 10 points, name this
conserved quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept or prompt on "angular momentum"]
Whether or not this quantity for light in a dielectric varies inversely or directly with the index of
refraction is the subject of the Minkowski-Abraham controversy. The energy of a photon equals the
speed of light times this quantity. A formulation of the uncertainty principle states that this quantity
and (*) position cannot be simultaneously known to exactness. Net force is equal to the time derivative of
this quantity, while the change in it is given by impulse. All collisions proceed without a net change of this
quantity, as it is a conserved quantity. For ten points, name this physical quantity symbolized p and equal to
the product of an object's mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum (do not accept "angular momentum")
Free-particle solutions to the Schrodinger equation are eigenstates of this quantity's namesake operator.
For massless objects, this quantity is equal to the energy over the speed of light. The change in this quantity
is known as impulse, and it is conserved in both inelastic and elastic collisions. The original formulation of
Newton's Second Law states that its first derivative is equal to force. For 10 points, identify this product of
mass and velocity, denoted p.
ANSWER: linear momentum
Finding the time-derivative of the expectation value of this quantity gives Ehrenfest's theorem. In
Lagrangian mechanics, cyclic coordinates can be used if the generalized form of this quantity is
invariant. A relativistic form of this quantity has one component equal to E over c and the other
three equal to the classical components. This quantity is conserved due to the Lagrangian's
translational invariance according to (*) Noether's theorem. This quantity divides Planck's constant to
find de Broglie wavelength. The change in this quantity is equal to the impulse. This quantity is conserved
in both elastic and inelastic collision. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [accept p]
The conservation of this quantity is due to the translational invariance of the Lagrangian, according to
Noether's theorem. The De Broglie wavelength of a particle is equal to Planck's constant divided by this
quantity for the particle. Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle was originally given in terms of errors in
position and this quantity. This quantity is conserved in both inelastic and elastic collisions, and the change
in this quantity is equal to force times time, also known as impulse. For 10 points, name this quantity
symbolized p, equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum
For one type of this quantity, the commutator of two of its components is given by i times h-bar times the
third component. The quantum mechanical operator for one type of this quantity is negative i times h-bar
times the gradient. Classically, one type of this quantity equals the cross product of the position vector with
the other type of this quantity. Impulse equals the change in one type of this quantity, which is conserved in
inelastic collisions. For 10 points, name this quantity that comes in angular and linear types, the latter of
which equals mass times velocity.
ANSWER: momentum [accept linear momentum or angular momentum at any point; accept spin before "gradient"]
The operator for this quantity commutes with the position operator, and that operator is equal to
negative i times h-bar times the gradient operator. The De Broglie wavelength is equal to Planck's constant
divided by this quantity for a particle. The change in this quantity is equal to the impulse, and this quantity
is conserved in both elastic and inelastic collisions. For 10 points, name this vector quantity calculated by
taking the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept angular momentum]
This quantity is the conjugate variable of position. The de Broglie (duh BROY) equation sets wavelength
equal to Planck's constant divided by this quantity. This quantity, unlike kinetic energy, is conserved
regardless of whether a collision is elastic or inelastic. This quantity is symbolized P. For 10 points, name
this vector quantity found by multiplying mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept or prompt on "angular momentum"]
By replacing generalized velocities with the conjugate form of this quantity, one can reformulate
Lagrangian mechanics as Hamiltonian mechanics. In fluid dynamics, the Cauchy equation is
equivalent to the conservation of this quantity. Its operator in quantum mechanics is equal to i h-bar
times the partial derivative with respect to position. The conservation of this quantity proceeds from
translational symmetry according to Noether's theorem. According to the de (*) Broglie relation,
wavelength is equal to Planck's constant over this quantity. This quantity is conserved by inelastic
collisions. The change in this quantity is defined as the impulse. For 10 points, name this quantity
conventionally equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
In quantum mechanics, this quantity for a photon is given by h-bar times the wave vector k, while its
operator is given by h-bar divided by i, times the gradient. When light passes through a slit, the uncertainty
in the vertical component of this quantity is given by its horizontal component times wavelength over slit
width. The kinetic energy of a particle can be stated as this quantity squared over twice its mass. Because
the traditional statement for Newton's second law does not account for changes in mass, that law is better
stated as force equals the time derivative of this quantity. For 10 points, name this conserved quantity
denoted p, equal to the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum
A precise statement of Newton's second law is that the derivative of this quantity with respect to time
equals the net force on an object. The change in this quantity is called impulse. Unlike with kinetic
energy, both (*) inelastic and elastic collisions keep this value constant, according to its namesake law of
conservation. For 10 points, name this vector quantity abbreviated p, equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum (prompt on p before it is mentioned)
The Navier-Stokes equations are a special case of Cauchy's equation named for this quantity. The
quotient of Planck's constant and the de Broglie (duh BROI) wavelength is this quantity. The change in this
quantity equals the integral of force with respect to time. Recoil is a consequence of the conservation of this
quantity, which occurs in the absence of external forces, in both elastic and inelastic collisions. For 10
points, name this quantity symbolized p and equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [or p until it is read; do not accept or prompt on "angular momentum"]
The fact that the operator for this and position do not commute, called the canonical commutation relation,
underlies much of the weirdness of quantum mechanics. This quantity is proportional to wavenumber. A
term containing this variable must be added to Einstein's "E equals m c squared" equivalence to make it
exactly correct. Planck's constant divided by this quantity equals a particle's de Broglie wavelength. The
square of this quantity divided by twice an object's mass equals kinetic energy. Force is the time derivative
of this quantity, and a change in this quantity is called an impulse. For 10 points, name this kinematic
quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [or translational momentum]
The quantum mechanical operator for this quantity is negative i times h-bar times the gradient, and Planck's
constant divided by this quantity gives the De Broglie wavelength. By Newton's second law, force is the
time derivative of this quantity, whose change is known as the impulse. Unlike kinetic energy, it is
conserved in inelastic collisions, and it is usually symbolized "p." For 10 points, name this quantity, the
product of the mass and velocity of a moving body.
ANSWER: linear momentum
The relativistic four-vector version of this physical quantity is proposed under Lorentzian translation, and
Euler's first law relates this quantity with the velocity of a frame of reference. Change in this quantity is
called impulse, and its conservation leads directly to the law of reciprocal actions and can be observed in
Newton's cradle. According to Newton's second law, force is the derivative of this quantity. For 10 points,
identify this physical quantity, the product of mass and velocity of an object.
ANSWER: (linear) momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
In quantum mechanics, this property is given by Dirac's constant over i times the gradient, and it's
not position, but a discredited thought experiment that predicts the future through present
knowledge of it everywhere is called Laplace's demon. In relativistic physics, this quantity's formula
includes the rest mass and the [*] Lorentz factor. This property and kinetic energy are conserved in elastic
collisions, and this quantity's change is known as impulse while its time derivative is force. For 10 points,
name this measure symbolized p, defined as an object's mass times its velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
A system's Hamiltonian differentiated with respect to a generalized version of this quantity is equal to the
time derivative of position. It is described in quantum mechanics by i times h-bar times the gradient
operator, and its Planck unit is equal to h bar over the Planck length, and it is equal to Planck's constant
divided by a particle's de Broglie wavelength. Via Noether's theorem, it results from translational
invariance of laws of motion. Impulse describes its change in time, and force is its derivative. For 10 points,
name this quantity conserved in elastic and inelastic collisions, the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [or translational momentum; do not accept "angular momentum"]
The conservation of this quantity is a consequence of the translational invariance of the Lagrangian, and this
quantity is canonically conjugate to position. The kinetic energy of a particle is equal to this quantity
squared divided by two times the mass. Impulse is the change in this quantity. Newton's second law states
that the time derivative of this quantity is equal to net force. The net value for this quantity in a system,
along with the value of kinetic energy, is conserved in an elastic collision. For 10 points, name this vector
quantity defined as mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept or prompt on "angular momentum"]
For a control volume defined inside a boundary layer over a non-flat surface, the flux of this quantity
can be determined using a von Karman integral. The diffusion of this quantity in a fluid is
represented by the numerators of the Schmidt and Prandtl numbers, which contain the kinematic
viscosity. The sum over all particles of this quantity for the particle dotted with the position of the
particle gives the scalar virial. In special relativity, this quantity is unified with (*) total energy into a
4-vector. This quantity is equal to Planck's constant divided by the de Broglie wavelength. The ideal rocket
equation can be derived from its conservation. The change in this quantity is equal to the impulse. For 10
points, name this quantity which is conserved in collisions and is equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum
This quantity's operator equals "negative i h-bar del," and it equals Planck's constant divided by the de
Broglie wavelength. The translational invariance of the Lagrangian gives rise to one property of this
quantity, which is the canonical conjugate of position. Euler's first law gives this quantity in terms of the
velocity of the center of mass, and it equals zero in the center-of-mass frame of reference. The original
statement of Newton's second law was that force equals this quantity's derivative. This quantity is
conserved in collisions within closed systems. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to mass times
velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
This quantity's namesake quantum mechanical operator is equal to negative I times Dirac's constant times
the gradient operator. Taking the Fourier transform of that operator yields the conjugate position operator,
and it is equal to Planck's constant over the wavelength. The Noether charge of translational invariance, its
derivative is equal to mass times acceleration, or force. Always conserved in a closed system, for 10 points,
name this quantity, usually defined as equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: Momentum
Spin is projected onto this vector to find helicity. This quantity is equal to the derivative of a Lagrangian
with respect to velocity. Squaring this quantity and dividing by twice the mass gives kinetic energy.
Newton's 2nd Law can be expressed by setting the derivative of this quantity with respect to time for
constant mass systems equal to net force. The change in this quantity is equal to the impulse, and this
quantity is conserved even in inelastic collisions. Name this quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum
Kinetic energy is equal to this quantity squared over twice the mass. For a photon, this quantity is equal
to Planck's constant divided by the wavelength. Although it is not velocity, the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle states that both position and this quantity cannot be known for a particle to arbitrarily high
precision. Its change with respect to time is force, and the change in it is impulse. This quantity is measured
in kilogram-meters per second and is conserved in all collisions. For 10 points, identify this quantity
calculated as the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
For a particle, this quantity is equal to the quotient of Planck's (PLONKS) constant and the wavelength.
According to Noether's (NOY-turz) Theorem, the conservation of this quantity is due to the fact that the
laws of physics are the same everywhere in space. The net force on a body is equal to the time derivative of
this quantity. For 10 points, name this product of a body's mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
This value times the relativistic angular momentum tensor times the
permutation symbol times one half equals the Pauli-Lubanski pseudovector.
The material derivative is equal to the del operator times the stress tensor
plus f in Cauchy's equation for this quantity. This value's quantum mechanical
operator equals negative i times h-bar times the gradient operator, and hbar over two is a lower bound for the product of the standard deviations of
this quantity and(*) position according to Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. The time
derivative of this quantity is impulse, and Newton's First Law embodies this quantity's
conservation. For ten points, identify this quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum (do not prompt on or accept "angular momentum")
A thought experiment which maps the future of the universe based on the knowledge of this property
and location of all particles is known as Laplace's demon. The one dimensional quantum mechanical
operator for it is equal to negative i times h bar times the partial derivative of x. The change in this
quantity is equal to impulse, and its time derivative is equal to force. For 10 points, identify this vector
quantity which is the product of mass and velocity and is often symbolized p.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
In relativistic mechanics, this quantity is multiplied by the Lorentz factor, and along with kinetic energy, it
is conserved in a certain process in which the coefficient of restitution is one. An object that is moving in
any reference frame will be observed to have this vector quantity in that frame. It's conservation can be
demonstrated using Newton's cradle as well as in elastic collisions, but some of it is lost when the colliding
bodies stick together in inelastic collisions. FTP, identify this quantity, which comes in linear and angular
varieties, and when multiplied with velocity gives force.
ANSWER: momentum
The operator representation of this variable is negative i times h-bar times the partial derivative
with respect to x. This variable appears in the denominator of the equation for the de Broglie
wavelength. Unlike kinetic energy, it is conserved in both (*) inelastic and elastic collisions. The change
in this variable is defined as the impulse. Its time derivative is equal to force. For 10 points, identify this
vector quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [or translational momentum; do not accept "angular momentum"]
With a particle in a conservative force field, the partial derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to velocity
is equal to this. The wavefunction in terms of this quantity can be obtained from the wavefunction in terms
of position via a Fourier transform. The quantum mechanical operator for this is equal to negative i times h-
bar times the gradient operator. This concept can be used in a ballistic pendulum to calculate a bullet's
velocity after it hits a block. The rotational form of this concept can be found as the product of the moment
of inertia and rotational velocity. Name this quantity which is classically defined as mass multiplied by
velocity.
ANSWER: momentum
By Poynting's theorem, the density of this value can be calculated for traveling electromagnetic
waves to be epsilon nought E cross B. For a charged particle, its canonical form includes a term
proportional to the vector potential. In quantum mechanics its operator is given by minus i times h-
bar del, and by Noether's theorem the conservation of this quantity follows from translation
invariance of space. (*) Impulse is defined as the change in this quantity with respect to time, which is
conserved in inelastic collisions. For 10 points, name this quantity, sometimes symbolized by p, which can
be expressed as mass times velocity.
ANSWER: Linear Momentum [prompt on p before mentioned]
In relativistic calculations, energy is equal to the square root of rest mass squared plus c-squared times this
quantity squared. Its operator is negative i times h-bar times the gradient operator, and for a photon, it is
given as Planck's constant over wavelength according to de Broglie's formula. Squaring this and dividing
by twice an object's mass gives kinetic energy, and its time derivative is equal to force according to
Newton's Second Law. For 10 points, identify this physical quantity, the change in which is impulse, and
which equals the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
In quantum mechanics, the Fourier transform of this quantity's operator is represented by the position
operator, and this quantity's operator is equal to negative i times h bar times the gradient. Translation
invariance of the Hamiltonian or Lagrangian implies conservation of this quantity, which is equal to the
product of h bar and the wave number for a photon. It is conserved in both elastic and inelastic collisions,
and its change in a given time interval is the impulse. Its time derivative is equal to the product of mass and
acceleration by Newton's Second Law. For 10 points, identify this product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
The cross product of this quantity's vector with the L vector, minus "mass times k times r-hat," gives the
Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector. One law governing this quantity is a consequence of the Lagrangian's
translational invariance. The time rate of change in this quantity is equal to a particle's net force according
to Newton's second law. Taking Planck's constant over this quantity gives a particle's de Broglie
wavelength. Like all closed systems, both inelastic and elastic collisions conserve this quantity. For 10
points, name this quantity that equals mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
This quantity is given by Dirac's constant over i times the gradient in quantum mechanics, and it is the
conjugate variable of position. A particle's wavelength is equal to Planck's constant over this quantity
according to de Broglie's law. Change in this quantity is called impulse, and in both elastic and inelastic
collisions, this quantity is conserved. Its time derivative is force. For 10 points, name this quantity from
mechanics that is the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: Linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
One form of this quantity is modified by the principle of least coupling to include the product of charge and
vector potential, and its operator can be defined in simple cases as the negative product of i, h bar, and the
gradient. In the relativistic four-vector of it, the first term is energy divided by the speed of light, and that
form is also included in a generalization of the classical stress tensor. Noether's theorem relates the
conservation of this quantity to translational invariance, and its time rate of change is related to force via
Newton's Second Law. For 10 points, name this quantity that is conserved in collisions and calculated as the
product of mass and velocity, symbolized p.
ANSWER: linear momentum
In quantum mechanics, the operator for this quantity is written as negative i h-bar grad. Although not
acceleration, for rigid body motion, Euler's first law can be formulated in terms of this vector quantity.
While inelastic collisions do not conserve kinetic energy, they do conserve this quantity. For a force that
depends on time, the integral from time one to time two of the force with respect to time gives the change
in this quantity, or impulse. For 10 points, identify this quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [or translational momentum]
The canonical variety of this quantity is equal to the partial derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to qdot. Wave vectors exist in a space named for this quantity, which for a wave is equal to h-bar times the
wave number. At relativistic speeds, energy equals this quantity times the speed of light, while classically,
kinetic energy equals this quantity squared divided by two times mass. The uncertainty in this quantity times
the uncertainty in position must be at least h-bar over two, according to the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle. Unlike kinetic energy, this quantity is always conserved, even in inelastic collisions. For 10
points, name this quantity equal to mass times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum" at any point]
When the potential of a free particle is zero, the eigenfunctions of this quantity are equal to the
eigenfunctions of energy, and the quantum mechanical operator for this quantity is negative i h-bar times
the gradient. In classical mechanics, the change in this quantity is represented by a quantity that is also the
integral of force times time, which is impulse. This quantity is conserved in elastic collisions. For 10 points,
identify this physical quantity defined as the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: momentum
The density of this quantity in an electromagnetic field is equal to epsilon-nought times mu-nought times the
Poynting vector. In Hamiltonian mechanics this quantity is generalized as the derivative of the Lagrangian
with respect to the generalized velocity. This quantity is represented by the operator negative i times h-bar
times the gradient. The coefficient of restitution measures how well this quantity is conserved in collisons.
Newton's second law suggests that impulse is the change in this quantity, or alternately that the time
derivative of this quantity is the force. For 10 points, name this physical quantity, equal to mass times
velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum"]
The operator for this quantity fails to commute with the position operator. The conservation of
this quantity is given by space translation symmetry by Noether's Theorem. Special relativity
predicts that energy is equal to this quantity times the speed of light. This quantity is conserved in
perfectly (*) inelastic collisions, while, according to Newton's second law, time multiplied by impulse is
equal to this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity equaled to the product of a particle's mass and
velocity.
ANSWER: momentum
Whether photons have this quantity was the subject of the Abraham-Minkowski controversy. The change
in this quantity is equal to the impulse. It's not velocity, but this property and position cannot be known
with perfect precision by Heisenberg's principle. Newton's second law says the time derivative of it is equal
to force. Newton's laws of motion also imply its conservation in a closed system. Its rotational analog is
equal to the moment of inertia times the angular velocity. For 10 points, name this product of velocity and
mass.
ANSWER: linear momentum
In a lattice, the product of h-bar with the wave vector of the lattice gives the crystal variety of this
property, which is sometimes assigned to phonons. In 2010 Barnett resolved a century long
controversy by showing that both Abraham and Minkowski had correct formulae for this quantity
for light in a medium. One form of this quantity is only conserved for central forces while Planck's
constant is divided by another to get the de Broglie wavelength. Relativistically this is described as a
4-vector with the relativistic energy over c being the first term. This quantity is conserved in both elastic an
inelastic collisions. Appearing in the original form of Newton's Second law, the linear version of this
quantity , when crossed with the position vector, gives the Angular form of this quantity. FTP, name this
quantity which is always conserved and which is typically given for linear motion as mass times velocity.
ANSWER: momentum [Anti prompt on linear or angular momentum before those words are mentioned]
The time component of the four-vector form of this quantity represents energy, while generalized
forms of it are conjugate to position variables in Hamiltonian and Lagrangian mechanics. For a
photon, the magnitude of this quantity is equal to h-bar times the wavenumber, while a change in this
quantity due to a (*) force is called impulse. It is equal to zero in a center-of-mass frame, and one form of
Newton's second law states that force is the time derivative of this quantity. Conserved, unlike kinetic
energy, in both elastic and inelastic collisions, for 10 points, name this physical quantity equal to an object's
mass times its velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept "angular momentum", accept "relativistic momentum" before "generalized"]
For one type of this quantity, the commutator of two of its components is given by i times h-bar times the
third component. The quantum mechanical operator for one type of this quantity is negative i times h-bar
times the gradient. Classically, one type of this quantity equals the cross product of the position vector with
the other type of this quantity. Impulse equals the change in one type of this quantity, which is conserved in
inelastic collisions. For 10 points, name this quantity that comes in angular and linear types, the latter of
which equals mass times velocity.
ANSWER: momentum [accept linear momentum or angular momentum at any point; accept spin before "gradient"]
In Hamilton-Jacobi formulation of mechanics, Hamilton's principal function depends on the integral
of this quantity with respect to a generalized position. The derivative of the Lagrangian with respect
to a generalized velocity gives the generalized form of this quantity, whose generalized form's time
derivative appears in one of Hamilton's equations. The free particle Hamiltonian is proportional to
this quantity (*) squared divided by the mass. Newton's Second Law can be stated in terms of the change
in this quantity as that change is equal to the net force. Conserved in both elastic and inelastic collisions, for
10 points, is which vector quantity often denoted p, and defined as mass times velocity?
ANSWER: linear momentum [do not accept angular momentum]
A controversy exists over the calculation of this quantity for electromagnetic waves in dielectrics
between equations proposed by Minkowski and by Abraham; Barnett suggests that one equation
gives the kinetic and the other gives the canonical form of this quantity. This quantity is always equal
to the Planck constant over an object's (*) de Broglie wavelength. Special relativity sets the square of
energy equal to c to the fourth times invariant mass squared plus c squared times this quantity squared. This
quantity is conserved in all closed system collisions, whether elastic or inelastic. For 10 points, name this
quantity, equal to the product of mass and velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum
In translational motion, Noether's Theorem states that invariance of physical systems leads to its common
treatment in classical mechanics. For objects without rest mass, it is given as energy over the speed of light
or Planck's constant over wavelength. In quantum mechanics, it is a conjugate variable with position, and in
classical mechanics, its change is given as the time integral of force, also known as impulse. For 10 points,
name this physical quantity which is conserved in closed, isolated systems, commonly defined as the
product of mass and the velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum [prompt on momentum; do not accept "angular momentum"]
The relative motion of this object is the subject of a hypothetical violation of the strong equivalence
principle called the Nordvedt effect. Several parameters governing this body's orbit are named for
Delaunay. This object's magnetic field is not dipolar, indicating that it is not generated by a dynamo,
but rather originates from its (*) crust. The Nectaris impact basin is used to define two of this object's
geologic periods, and its largest impact crater is the Aitken basin. It is believed to have been formed by the
impact of Theia, a Mars-sized body. Mascons are gravitational anomalies of this body, possibly due to its
basaltic maria, or seas. For 10 points, name this crater-filled satellite of the Earth.
ANSWER: the moon [or Luna]
One spot at this location named "Hermite" once recorded a temperature at 25 Kelvin. A large feature at
this location is a basin partially named for Robert Grant Aitken, which is 13 kilometers deep. The
Clementine mission looked for evidence of water at this place. The "giant impact hypothesis" claims it was
created by another object colliding with the entity Theia, which was about the size of Mars. One notable
feature on this object is the Sea of Tranquility, which is where Apollo 11 landed. For 10 points, name this
satellite of the third planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Earth's Moon
Among the still unexplained features of this body are Schroter's valley and the magnetic anomaly Reiner
Gamma, and rare minerals first found here include armalcolite and KREEP lava. Detailed maps of this
body's polar regions were made by the Clementine spacecraft, and it has several mascon basins such as
Imbrium and Orientale. The geography of this body, which includes straight valleys called rilles, is divided
into highlands and maria, and when aligned with the Sun, this object causes spring tides. First visited by
humans at the Sea of Tranquility in July 1969, name this natural satellite that takes about 27 days to orbit
the Earth.
ANSWER: Moon [or Luna]
Early theories of this object's formation include the fission theory and the co-accretion theory, while the
current accepted theory is occasionally referred to as the "Big Splash" and involves collision with a
Mars-sized object. This object contains ray craters such as those named Tycho and Copernicus, and its
major features are classified as either terrae or maria. For 10 points, name this only extraterrestrial object
visited by humans, the only satellite of the third planet from the sun.
ANSWER: the Earth's moon [or Luna]
This celestial object has a feature called the Aitken basin, which is about eight miles deep. This object
was examined by Chandrayaan-1 (chan-druh-YAH-uhn). One hypothesis proposes that it was created by a
collision between a planet and body sometimes called Theia (THAY-ee-uh), which was about the size of
Mars. This object is home to large basaltic plains referred to as "maria," which include the Sea of
Tranquility. For 10 points, identify this astronomical object explored by Apollo 11, which is the only
satellite of the Earth.
ANSWER: the Earth's Moon
Clive R. Neal found that this object's mostly dense core allows quakes on it to propagate for over ten
minutes. This body's gravitational field is home to "mascon" anomalies that correspond to the large
basins on its surface, which include the Aitken basin at this body's south pole. The "fission," "coformation,"
and "capture" hypotheses claim to explain this body's formation, but fail to explain the high
angular momentum of its system like the "Giant Impact" hypothesis does. For 10 points, name this body,
home to the Tycho crater and many maria, that orbits the Earth.
ANSWER: the moon [accept Luna]
Bright glows on this object, called LTPs, have been observed by Earth-based telescopes and are
possibly due to outgassing. The Valles Alpis extends out from the Frigoris Basin towards this body's
Imbrium basin, which is a MASCON. This body's surface has long channel-like rifts called rilles in it,
while Tycho and Copernicus are some of the brightest (*) impact craters on this object's surface. Along
with craters, the most prominent features on this object are the large basalt-filled valleys called Maria or
seas. This object's Sea of Tranquility was the landing spot for Apollo 11. For 10 points, name this celestial
object that orbits the Earth.
ANSWER: Moon
This astronomical body was visited and orbited by the Clementine spacecraft. This object features a large
crater called the South Pole - Aitken basin. One hypothesis of its creation is the Giant Impact Hypothesis. It
has basaltic plains called maria such as the Sea of Tranquility. The gravitational interaction between this
and the Earth is responsible for tides. For 10 points, name this object that orbits the Earth.
ANSWER: moon
A new theory of this body postulates that it collided with a much smaller companion, causing the observed
discrepancy that its visible side contains low-lying lava plains while the farside is composed of highlands.
Name this celestial body where rilles and wrinkle ridges are commonly found and whose highlands are
called terrae (TEH-ray).
ANSWER: the Earth's Moon
The formation of this body resulted in the presence of a surprising geochemical mixture of
potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus called "KREEP." Spacecraft journeying near this
body must be wary of mascons, gravitational anomalies associated with its Imbrium (*) basin. This
body is locked in synchronous rotation with the body it orbits. It contains light highlands called terrae and
dark plains of hardened lava called maria. For 10 points, name this natural satellite that orbits the Earth.
ANSWER: the Earth's moon [or Luna]
The Japanese Hiten spacecraft visited this object in 1990, and the Chinese Chang'e system is looking for
helium-3 on this object. The largest impact crater in the Solar System, the South Pole-Aitken basin, is also
the point of lowest elevation on this object, which was photographed by the Clementine craft. Oceanus
Procellarum is notable feature on this object that does not contain any impact craters. Most US space
missions to this object landed in the Sea of Tranquility, one of its namesake maria. FTP, name this celestial
object which causes tides and revolves around the Earth.
ANSWER: Moon
It is not Mercury, but in 1998, it was discovered that this body produces a tail composed of sodium atoms.
This object's lowest point is within the Aitken basin, and a widely accepted theory proposes that it was
created in the "Big Splash." Approximately one sixth of its surface is comprised of basaltic plains known as
maria, one of which is known as the Sea of Tranquility. Earth's tides are caused primarily by the
gravitational effects of, for 10 points, what heavily cratered celestial body visited by the Apollo missions?
ANSWER: Earth's moon
The reliability of these devices is affected by TDDB, HCI and NBTI. Buried layers are used in these
devices to prevent latchup. A measure usually abbreviated g-sub-m, the transconductance, is important in
characterizing these devices. The accumulation of minority carriers near the surface of the substrate creates
an inverted layer in these devices; that inverted layer is pinched off in the saturation region and, depending
on that layer's composition, results in these devices being classified as n- or p-channel. These devices can be
categorized into depletion or enhancement mode depending on their threshold voltage. These devices can
suffer from parasitic capacitance when the gate overlaps the drain and source. For 10 points, identify this
most popular type of transistor that supplanted the BJT.
ANSWER: MOSFET [or metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor; or MOS transistor; or other types of field-effect transistors, such as insulated-gate (IG), modulation-doped (MOD), junction gate (J), metal-semiconductor (MES), tunnel (T) and numerous less common ones]
Measurements of this effect can display a relativistic time dilation or second-order Doppler shift that was
derived by Josephson from the mass-energy relation. The fraction of events that exhibits this effect is
sometimes known as the Debye-Waller factor. The ionization state strongly affects one of the hyperfine
interactions that can be studied using this effect, the isomer shift. One study utilizing a sample of iron-57
made use of this effect in measuring gravitational redshift, and was conducted by Pound and Rebka. For 10
points, name this special case of nuclear resonance fluorescence in which gamma-ray absorption or
emission from a lattice or extremely viscous fluid occurs in a recoil-free fashion.
ANSWER: Mossbauer effect
This effect, when anisotropic behavior is present, but cubic symmetry is not, is known as the Goldanskii-
Karyagin effect. An effect analogous to it can occur in "phonon wings," and the fraction of events that
experience it is given by the Debye-Waller factor. Applications of it include studying chemical shift and
quadrupole splitting. Walter Kundig used it to quantitatively verify the transverse Doppler effect, and it was
also applied to measure the gravitational redshift at Harvard by Pound and Rebka. Utilized in a similarly
named type of spectroscopy, for 10 points, name this effect, the recoil-less absorption of gamma rays.
ANSWER: Mossbauer effect
Spectral lines generated by this effect are moved when one nuclear isomer is replaced by another, and in
order for this effect to occur E sub R must be less than one-half of the linewidth for the corresponding
transition. Spectral lines of molecules undergoing this effect display a characteristic namesake "wing". One
quantity important in this effect is equal to the exponential of a polynomial involving the absolute value of
the scattering vector q, and gives a ratio of transitions via this effect to purely resonant transitions, known as
the Debye-Waller factor. Originally discovered in a block of Iridium, this effect was used via a pair of
samples of iron attached to loudspeakers in order to prove the existence of gravitational redshift by Pound
and Rebka. For 10 points, name this effect in which solid atoms absorb and emit gamma rays in a recoil-free
manner, named for a German.
ANSWER: Mossbauer effect
In one case, the result of this phenomenon is governed by the Debye-Waller effect, while otherwise,
different spin states may be characterized by this effect using quadrupole splitting resulting from crystals
that do not have cubic symmetry. Its mechanism was posited after gases failed to display a certain
phenomenon, while solid iridium did. Its most famous application involved a loudspeaker, a huge bag of
helium gas and iron-57 nuclei; that experiment, which tested the effects of general relativity, used the
Doppler effect along with its namesake spectroscopy and was named for Pound and Rebka. For 10 points,
name this effect that describes resonant and recoil-free absorption and emission of gamma rays.
ANSWER: Mossbauer effect
Seiji Ogawa discovered a modification to this procedure in which blood oxygen-level dependent
contrast can be used. That "functional" form of this procedure occurs on the brain. This procedure takes
advantage of interaction between nuclear spin states when exposed to a strong magnetic field. Paul
Lauterbur used this technique in order to produce the first cross-sectional image of a mouse. For ten points,
name this medical imaging procedure which is more extensive than X-rays.
ANSWER: MRI [or magnetic resonance imaging; prompt on nuclear magnetic resonance; prompt on NMR]
A quantity represented alternately by nu and this letter is found in Sutherland's formula. Another
quantity represented by this letter is the quotient of the magnetic flux density and the magnetic field;
with a certain subscript, it multiplies I in the most common version of Ampere's Law. In addition to
viscosity and magnetic permeability, this letter also represents the coefficient of friction. For 10 points,
name this Greek letter that also represents the prefix "micro-."
ANSWER: mu
One accurate reading of this particle's mass was accomplished by looking at 3d to 2p transitions
during the capture of these particles by silicon 28. One somewhat inaccurate model for how these
particles interact with atoms in systems with more than one element is the Fermi-Teller law. The
E821 experiment is one of several experiments that have measured a small about 2.6 sigma
discrepancy in this particle's g - 2 from that predicted by the standard model. Negative pions decay
into a neutrino and one of these particles. These particles have a half life of (*) 2.2 microseconds,
however the half life of those generated from cosmic rays can appear to be longer because of time dilation.
These particles are leptons that have around 200 times the mass of an electron. For 10 points, name this
lepton that is not an electron, tau, nor neutrino.
ANSWER: muon [or minus muon; or negative muon]
The SINDRUM II experiment looks for the one-particle decay of this particle, and Louis Michel
sometimes names the standard decay mode of this particle. This particle was discovered by Street
and Stevenson in a Wilson Cloud Chamber, and was at first conflated with the carrier of the residual
strong force proposed by Yukawa. The long lifetime of this particle, two point two micro-seconds, is
an important test of time dilation because this particle makes up most of the final decay product of cosmic
rays that reach sea level. The bound system of a positive form of this particle and an electron behaves like a
hydrogen atom with one ninth the mass. For 10 points, name this lepton approximately two hundred times
heavier than the electron.
ANSWER: Muon [accept Mu Meson from anyone who looks old enough to have been around when they still called it that]
The experiment called TWIST studies the decays of polarized versions of these particles. Resistive plate
chambers are often used in the detection system for these, and one of the two main LHC detectors is named
for its ability to detect these particles. These unstable particles have an anomalous magnetic moment that is
very sensitive to supersymmetric effects, while scientists have also investigated their ability to catalyze
nuclear fusion. Seth Neddermeyer and Carl Anderson discovered them, and intially confused them for
Yukawa's meson. For 10 points, identify these leptons which are 207 times more massive than electrons.
ANSWER: muons
The E821 Experiment at the Brookhaven National Laboratory studied the movement of this particle and its
anti-variety in an external magnetic field. A stream of protons striking graphite at high speed can produce
them, while the decay of polarized ones into electrons is expressed in terms of Michel parameters. and are
themselves the result of the decay of pions. With a lifetime of about 2.2 microseconds these are, FTP, what
leptons discovered by Carl Anderson in 1936 with a mass roughly 207 times greater than an electron?
ANSWER: muons
The decay of polarized versions of these particles are used to explain the left-right asymmetry of the
weak interaction in the TWIST experiment. They-re not electrons, but their anomalous g-factor cannot be
explained by QED, a fact used as evidence for non-Standard Model effects. These particles decay into a
positron, an electron neutrino, and namesake antineutrino with lifetime of about 2.2 microseconds, and
were initially confused for pions after their prediction by Yukawa. Replacing the electron in hydrogen with
one of these can catalyze room-temperature fusion because they are 207 times more massive than the
electron. On earth, they mostly come from cosmic rays. For 10 points, name this negatively-charged
spin-one-half elementary particle.
ANSWER: muon
Deriving this equation in general requires the assumption that normal stresses sum to zero, which is a
hypothesis named for one of this equation's namesakes; that hypothesis allows the usual right-hand side of
this equation to be written as the divergence of the stress tensor. Including a magnetostatic body force term
on the aforementioned right-hand side results in the MHD equations. In the high-deformability limit, this
equation reduces to the Euler equation. Using the pi theorem on the usual form of this equation yields the
Reynolds number. For 10 points, name this vector equation that governs the motion of continuous
Newtonian fluids and that has solvability conditions that are an important open question in physics.
ANSWER: the Navier-Stokes equations
A formal averaging procedure can be used on these to obtain Darcy's Law. By using these equations and
applying Newton's first law to a case with zero acceleration, the Hagen-Poiseuille equation can be derived.
When heat conductivity and another quantity are zero, these equations simplify to the Euler equations. One
of the Millennium Prize Problems is the namesake existence and smoothness of solutions to these equations.
This set of equations is useful only at low Knudsen numbers, and solutions are easier to find when the
Reynolds number is small. For 10 points, name this set of nonlinear partial differential equations that
describe the motion of fluids.
ANSWER: Navier-Stokes equations
The Churchill-Bernstein equation is a simplification of this to estimate the Nusselt number for a
cylinder. Jean Leray proved the existence of a weak solution, and in the continuous limit, the Lattice
Boltzmann equation is a (*) solution. The convective acceleration term confers a nonlinear effect,
contributing to the difficulty in determining a full solution to this Millenium Problem. Taking the curl
eliminates the pressure term from these equations, and further simplification arises when considering only
isochoric or Newtonian fluids. For 10 points, name these partial differential equations of fluid dynamics that
describe the flow of viscous liquids.
ANSWER: Navier-Stokes equations
These differential equations remain unsolved in general, perhaps because they don't even make the
assumption that the fluid in question is incompressible or that the fluids are Newtonian. Identify these
fundamental equations of fluid flow, which simplify to much more manageable cases assuming zero
viscosity and other fantasies.
ANSWER: Navier-Stokes equations
Barnard 33 is an example of a dark one. The Wings of the Butterfly one and the Red Square one are
examples of the bipolar type. The Pleiades is an example of a reflection type, which do not produce
much visible light, and the Omega one is an example of an emission type, which contain ionized gas.
Italo Calvino wrote in his short story "At Daybreak" about living in one. The term was originally
used for any extended astronomical object, and was used to describe the Andromeda Galaxy at one
time. (*) The Eagle one contains the Pillars of Creation, and other notable ones include the Cat's Eye and
Crab ones. FTP, give the name for an interstellar cloud of dust, gas, and plasma, which comes from the
Latin for "mist", also known as a "stellar nursery".
ANSWER: nebula
Colin Gum catalogued these objects of the southern hemisphere, and Sharpless did the same thing for the
northern one. The Great Debate was a question of whether or not some of these objects were actually
outside the Milky Way. Bok globules are often found in the H II regions which comprise the vast majority
of these objects. Mass loss by Asymptotic Giant Branch stars produce one variety of these objects, while
hot stars produce ionization to form the emission variety. The Coalsack is one of its dark variety, while the
Helix one, with a white dwarf at its center, is its (*) "planetary" variety. For ten points, identify these
interstellar clouds associated with star birth and death.
ANSWER: nebulae (or nebulas, aceept emission nebulas until the end of the second sentence)
H II (eitch two) regions are one of these objects; the first known H II region was the Orion one of these.
The planetary form of these objects are formed when the outer part of a star is blown away. The first object
in the Messier (MESS-ee-yay) catalog is one of these objects. The NASA image "Pillars of Creation"
depicts one of these objects. Another of these objects was formed from a supernova observed by Chinese
astronomers in 1054. For 10 points, name these interstellar clouds of dust and gas that include the Crab and
Eagle.
ANSWER: nebulae
Regions of hydrogen ions known as HII [H two] may be found in the emission type of this object. A
red giant's outer layers can be ionized by the star's core to form its planetary type, and these may
also form from the remnant ionized gases of a (*) supernova, such as the 1054 supernova that created
one of these nicknamed Crab. The Pillars of Creation and the Horsehead are examples of, for 10 points,
what interstellar clouds of dust and gas?
ANSWER: Nebula
These objects are similar to cluster of ionized hydrogen called HII regions. Those formed from
the breakup of an aging star are known as the planetary. Examples of these objects include the
Horsehead variant found in the Orion Constellation, the Eagle variant from which the photograph
"Pillars of Creation" was taken, and one formed after a (*) 1054 supernova observed by Chinese
astronomers known as Crab. For 10 points, name these interstellar clouds of gas and dust that are often the
birthplace of stars.
ANSWER: nebula
One of these stellar objects is called Trifid, and its different regions include emission, reflection, and dark
types of these. The question as to whether or not all of them are located in the Milky Way was a main topic
of the Shapley-Curtis debate. One called the Tarantula in the Large Magellanic Cloud contains Supernova
1987A and is 650 light-years across. The planetary type got their name because they appear similar to
distant planets, and include the Eskimo and Dumbbell. Name these regions where star and planet formation
takes place, a type of interstellar cloud.
ANSWER: nebulae [accept nebulas]
Examples of these objects in the Messier catalog include M20, the Trifid, in Sagittarius. One type of
object given this name is the gas emitted by a dying star, which resembled planets in old telescopes and is
thus known as the "planetary" kind. One of these is found in Taurus and is Messier object M1, the remnants
of a supernova that burned day and night for three weeks in 1054. For 10 points, give this word, from the
Latin for "cloud," that designates large masses of gas in the interstellar medium, such as the "crab."
ANSWER: nebula [or nebulae]
Kant and Laplace's hypothesis for the mechanism of solar system formation is named for this kind
of structure. An example of this structure is the first item in the Messier (MESS-ee-ey) catalog. One
of these in Cygnus is named for the fact that it (*) resembles North America. Types include emission,
reflection, and planetary and one found in Orion takes its name from its shape, a horsehead. For 10 points,
give this term for a cloud of interstellar dust, examples of which include the "crab."
ANSWER: nebulas [or nebulae]
The emission type of these objects absorbs ultraviolet light and emits visible light, and that type often is
known as an H two region because it contains large amounts of atomic hydrogen. Those H two regions are
also classifed as the diffuse types of these, as are supernova remnants. Some famous examples of these are
the Trifid, Eagle, and Lagoon, and the type of these objects formed in the creation of a white dwarf is the
planetary type. Name these objects, including the Crab, that are interstellar clouds.
ANSWER: nebula or nebulae
An important contributor to the spectral lines of these objects is collisional excitations. These objects
are often found in conjunction with Wolf-Rayet stars and can, in that case, take on the shape of a
pinwheel. One subtype of these objects, sometimes called Stromgren spheres and usually found with
young O- and B-type stars, has characteristic emission lines of ionized hydrogen. That subtype is H II
regions, and another subtype is their planetary type. The creation of one of these objects was observed by
Chinese astronomers in 1054, after a supernova in Taurus. For 10 points, name these interstellar clouds of
gas and dust exemplified by the Crab.
ANSWER: emission nebulae [or planetary nebulas; or H II regions until is read]
One form of these objects has a bright emission spectrum at 500.7 nanometers which is the result of
electrons in oxygen and nitrogen inhabiting excited metastable stables to form so called "forbidden
lines". The remnant of that object will form a white dwarf. There are diffuse and planetary forms of
these objects, including the Cat's Eye and Horsehead varieties. The picture "The Pillars of Creation"
shows the Eagle one, while another one was formed following a supernova observed by Chinese
astronomers in 1054 AD. For 10 points, name these interstellar clouds of dust and gas which include one
named Crab.
ANSWER: nebula
These structures are the basic building blocks of the universe as they contain the elements which form stars
and solar systems. These are some of the largest objects in our galaxy, measuring hundreds of light-years
across. The emission and reflection types are bright but lack a noticeable shape while the planetary kind,
named for their brightness and round shape, are produced by stars ejecting their outer layers of gas. Neutron
stars and pulsars lie at the center of the supernova remnant type. FTP, what is this interstellar cloud of dust,
hydrogen gas, helium gas, and plasma which include the Eagle, Crab, and Hourglass ones.
ANSWER: nebulae
Carbon located with the outer layers of these regions exists in an ionized form while their inner
layers contain carbon monoxide, which primarily causes the cooling of these regions. Bernard
cataloged 182 of these objects that were subsequently named after him and most T (*) Tauri variable
stars are found within these regions. For 10 points, name these cold, dense interstellar clouds that are
opaque due to their internal dust grains, examples of which include the Coalsack nebula.
ANSWER: dark nebula (prompt on nebula)
Ophion was an early proposed name for this body, whose orbit discredited Bode's law. This planet
currently has seven identified Lagrangian asteroids, as well as rings named for Adams and Le Verrier and
the only large moon to revolve opposite its planet's rotation. The winds on this planet are the fastest in the
solar system, and a methane-rich atmosphere gives this planet its deep blue color. First recognized as a
planet by Galle and d-Arrest in 1846, a 1994 photo showed that this planet's Great Dark Spot had
mysteriously disappeared. Possessing moons called Nereid and Triton, name this fourth largest planet by
diameter and eighth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Neptune
One of this planet's moons contains distinctive cantaloupe terrain and two candidate cryovolcanoes known
as Hili and Mahilani. This planet's unstable ring system contains three prominent arcs named Liberty,
Equality, and Fraternity. Its largest moon was likely captured due to its unusual retrograde orbit. This planet
contains winds that approach 2100 km/hr, which are driven by the Great Dark Spot. The discovery of this
planet was deduced by Bouvard since a neighboring planet's orbit was gravitationally perturbed by it. One
of its moons is Triton. Voyager 2 visited this planet in 1989 after it visited Uranus. For 10 points, name this
planet that is the furthest away from the Sun.
ANSWER: Neptune
James Challis used the work of John Couch Adams to search for this object. In 1949, Gerad Kuiper
discovered what appears to be a captured asteroid orbiting this body. One of its notable satellites was
discovered by William Lassell. It was Heinrich d'Arrest and Johann Galle that first spotted this object, but
credit for its discovery is usually given to Le Verrier. Voyager II is the only probe to have ever visited this
planet and during that mission it photographed its moon Triton. For 10 points, name this eighth planet.
ANSWER: Neptune
This body holds a one-to-two resonance with the objects known as Twotinos. This object is itself
surrounded by rings named for Arago and Lassell, while its outermost Adams ring sports clumps
referred to as arcs. This body's atmosphere exhibits a feature known as the Wizard's Eye, and this
body has the strongest winds in the solar system, although its largest storm had apparently (*)
disappeared by 1994 and was known as the Great Dark Spot. Visited in 1989 by Voyager 2, for 10 points,
name this parent planet of the moon Triton and the outermost gas giant of the solar system.
ANSWER: Neptune
One of this entity's rings was named after the Second French Republic president, Francois Arago. The
Courage, Equality, Fraternity, and Liberty arcs make up this entity's Adams Ring. Satellites of this entity
orbiting between those rings include Thalassa, Despina, and Naiad. Stephen P. Synnott discovered the
moon Galatea orbiting this entity and the Pharos crater exists on this entity's moon Proteus. Storms on this
planet include The Scooter and The Wizard's Eye. Containing the moons Nereid and Triton, for 10 points,
name this planet which contains the Great Dark Spot and is the eighth planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Neptune
Smorovsky et. al. have argued for the broadening of cloud bands on this body as evidence of
changing seasons. Certain objects which are not controlled by orbital resonance with this body are
called cubewanos. Its existence was first hypothesized by Alexis Bouvard, and Urbain Le Verrier was
the first to calculate its position. One of its satellites features 'canteloupe terrain- and exhibits
cryovolcanism. It features the strongest winds of any planet, with speeds of up to 2,000 km/hr measured
around the Great Dark Spot. For 10 points, name this body whose largest satellite is Triton, and is now the
outermost planet in the solar system.
ANSWER: Neptune
This planet was discovered because a nearby planet was experiencing an odd gravitational effect. Voyager
II was sent to observe it, and the Adams ring is the largest ring around it. The largest moon that spins
retrograde orbits this planet on which a massive storm, the Great Dark Spot is found. The methane
atmosphere gives a blue hue to, for 10 points, what planet, orbited by Nereid and Triton, the furthest planet
from the sun?
ANSWER: Neptune
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity are the namesakes of the arcs surrounding this object. Two-tinos are named
for their 1:2 resonance with this object, and Mark Showalter recently discovered its fourteenth moon.
Cantaloupe terrain is found on this planet's largest moon, which has a retrograde orbit. Visited by Voyager 2
in 1989, this planet can perturb scattered disk objects. Johann Gottfried Galle [GAL-eh] discovered this
planet and is the namesake of its innermost ring. This planet was once home to a storm known as the Great
Dark Spot, and is named for the Roman god of the sea. For 10 points, name this planet that is orbited by
Triton and located beyond Uranus.
ANSWER: Neptune
One moon of this planet is known for its "cantaloupe terrain." Voyager 2 imaged this planet's
ring system in 1989, and its outermost ring, Adams, contains five noticeable arcs. Storms on this
planet's surface include the Scooter as well as the anti-cyclonic (*) Great Dark Spot, and its largest
moon is Triton. For 10 points, identify this Solar System planet which is, since Pluto's demotion, the
farthest planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Neptune
This planet's outermost ring, Adams, appears twisted, either from a smeared camera or interaction
with a shepherd satellite, and another satellite was only found when it eclipsed a star and was
subsequently lost until a visit by Voyager II. In addition to Galatea and Larissa, this planet's
atmosphere contains D2 and a (*) "scooter" which completes a revolution every sixteen hours. It's largest
moon sports both cantaloupe terrain and active nitrogen geysers and orbits in a retrograde orbit; that moon
is Triton. For 10 points, methane colors the Great Dark Spot blue of what eighth planet from the sun?
ANSWER: Neptune
This is the planet other than Earth where atmospheric storms have had an observed ending. One of its
moons has the most eccentric orbit of any non-comet satellite in the Solar System, while another has the
coldest measured temperature in the Solar System, and are named Nereid and Triton. For 10 points, name
this planet which has had various Great Dark Spots, was discovered by John Couch Adams and others by
finding the perturbations in Uranus's orbit, and is the eighth and most remote planet in the solar system.
ANSWER: Neptune
One storm on this planet is called Scooter. This planet's largest moon is unique among large moons
in the solar system for having a retrograde orbit. The only spacecraft to visit this planet was Voyager
2. A larger storm on this planet's surface is known as the Great (*) Dark Spot, which appears a
darkened spot on its blue surface. For 10 points, identify this planet whose moons include Triton and which
is, since Pluto's demotion, the furthest planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Neptune
Its two outermost satellites, Neso and Psamathe, have the largest orbital semimajor axes of any natural
satellites in the solar system. The orbit of its third-largest moon has a ridiculous eccentricity, over .75, while
the five distinct arcs of one of its rings are named Fraternite, Egalite 1 and 2, Liberte, and Courage. Its
largest satellite is known for its "cantaloupe terrain", while it also features the Galle, Lassell, and Le Verrier
rings. Its moon Galatea serves as a shepherd for its Adams ring. This planet experiences long lasting anti-
cyclonic storms that are generally referred to as Great Dark Spots. Its largest moon has an unusually high
albedo and exhibits cryovolcanism, and is called Triton. For 10 points, identify this planet located just
inside the Kuiper Belt and named after the Roman god of the sea.
ANSWER: Neptune
The 14th moon of this planet was discovered in 2013 by examining images dating back to 2004.
Its largest moon, which features several geysers that shoot out nitrogen gas, has a retrograde
orbit. Urbain Le Verrier predicted the location of this planet before it was observed because of
its gravitational impact on another planet, and Johann Galle [YOH-hahn GAH-luh] observed it in
1846. The atmosphere of this planet features several storm systems, one of which was named the
Great Dark Spot. Name this planet orbited by Triton that is similar in many ways to Uranus, and
which is now considered the outermost planet in our solar system.
ANSWER: Neptune
One structure near this object is divided into regions named Fraternite,Egalite and Liberte, and the
Lassell and La Verrier rings form around this body. This planet's moon Neso has the longest semimajor axis of any natural satellite. One of this planet's satellites is the site of the Andvari crater. An
object named for John Couch Adams on this planet is shepherded by its moon (*) Galatea. One of this
object's satellites has large regions of "cantaloupe terrain" and is the only large moon with a retrograde
orbit. This planet experiences anti-cyclone storms around its "great dark spot". For 10 points, name this
planet orbited by Triton, the furthest planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Neptune
The object 2008 LC-18 resides at this body's L5 Lagrangian point, and the New Horizons probe could
explore this area to search for other bodies. The Nice model suggests this body was ejected outwards,
forming the scattered disc in the process. It produces over twice as much heat as it receives from the sun,
which could be a driver of its many storms, such as Scooter. Confinement by its moon Galatea is
hypothesized to have formed its ring arcs, and its largest moon could have been formed from a binary
planetoid, which explains its (*) retrograde orbit. Home to the Great Dark Spot, for ten points, identify this
planet with moons Nereid and Triton, the eighth from the sun.
ANSWER: Neptune
The object that these bodies orbit has the largest Hill Sphere in the solar system. The first
one of these objects to be discovered was spotted by William Lassell seventeen days after
Johann Galle discovered the body it orbits, and the second one to be discovered was sighted by
Gerard Kuiper and is called Nereid. The largest of these bodies has an inclined orbit and is the
only object of its kind in the solar system to have a retrograde orbit. For 10 points, name these
bodies that include Triton, objects that orbit the outermost planet of the solar system.
ANSWER: Neptune's moons [accept equivalents like Neptune's satellites]
The number of possible classes of this particle is determined by observing Z boson decay. A model of
these particles predicts two sets of masses, one on the GUT scale, via a seesaw mechanism; that model
suggests that a type of these particles exists that only interacts via gravity, the "sterile" type. Data
collected from these particles (*) emitted by the sun showed that their mass and flavor eigenstates are
slightly different, leading to namesake "oscillations." A primary component of hot dark matter, one of these
particles is produced along with a beta particle in beta decay. For 10 points, name this low-mass electrically
neutral lepton named by Enrico Fermi to suggest a "little neutron."
ANSWER: neutrino [do not accept "neutron"]
The reciprocal relationship between the eigenvalues of the mass matrix of these particles is called the
"seesaw mechanism"; the larger eigenvalue may be the mass of their "sterile" variety. One
phenomenon predicted by Pontecorvo involving these entities was searched for by (*) MINOS. Reines
and Cowan used an aqueous cadmium chloride solution to detect them, and other detectors tend to include
large volumes of material, such as Super Kamiokande. For 10 points, name these leptons, the nearly
massless products of radioactive decay whose varieties include the muon and tau and which are represented
by the letter nu.
ANSWER: neutrinos
These particles add a 7/8 times four-elevenths to the four-thirds power term to the radiation density of
the universe because they decoupled around 2 seconds after the big bang. The thermoacoustic
properties of these particles are exploited in ANTARES. The 2002 Nobel Prize in Physics was
awarded partially for the detection of these particles coming from SN1987A. The Cherenkov
radiation created by these particles in huge tanks of pure water is a typical detection method used by
such observatories as Super-Kamiokande. First proposed in order to satisfy conservation laws in beta decay,
these particles were observed at the OPERA experiment at CERN in late 2011 to be moving faster than the
speed of light. FTP, name these nearly massless elementary particles which comes in 3 flavors, electron,
mu, and tau, and whose name means little neutral one in Italian.
ANSWER: Neutrino
The Gargamelle [GAHR-guh-mel] bubble chamber at CERN [sern] that was used to make early quark
measurements was designed to detect these particles. It gave evidence of these particles during the 1970s by
finding evidence of interactions involving W and Z bosons in the electroweak force. The oscillation of these
particles and the discovery that they have mass explains why we detect fewer of these from the Sun than
were expected earlier. Name these leptons, each type of which correlates with one of the other leptons.
ANSWER: neutrinos
In 2002, David and Toshiba earned the Nobel Prize in Physics for discovering the supernova types of
these particles, and C. S Wu of Columbia University showed that these particles are always lefthanded. These particles were first proposed by Pauli to account for the imbalance of mass in beta
decay, and their mass can be explained through a Dirac and Majorana term in the (*) seesaw
mechanism. They have half-integer spin and "oscillate" between their three flavors: "electron," "tau," and
"muon." For ten points, name these light, uncharged leptons whose name suggests a "little neutron."
ANSWER: neutrinos
Two emission events of these particles nicknamed Bert and Ernie were observed by the IceCube
observatory. One of the mixing angles of the PMNS matrix is to be measured by the T2K experiment, which
aims a beam of these particles. The mass of these particles can be understood by the seesaw mechanism.
This particle along with a positron is released in beta plus decay, and the(*) OPERA experiment observed
this particle's incorrect faster-than-light velocity. It exhibits oscillation between its tau, muon, and electron
flavors. Named by Enrico Fermi and postulated by Wolfgang Pauli, for ten points, name these neutral,
weakly interacting particles.
ANSWER: neutrino
The IceCube project in Antarctica is designed to detect these particles in the previously unexplored PeV
energy region and is based on the earlier AMANDA project also located near the South Pole. The direct
Urca process, described by George Gamow, is one the simplest interstellar processes which produce these
particles, and it is currently unproven whether these particles are Majorana particles, serving as their own
antiparticles. Work conducted at Super-Kamiokande provided evidence for flavor oscillation, which in turn
proves that they have non-zero mass. For 10 points, name these extremely low-mass, uncharged leptons,
which come in tau, mu, and electron varieties.
ANSWER: Neutrino
The PMNS matrix models one phenomenon involving these particles. The Homestake experiment set out to
measure them, but only turned up one third the predicted number. First postulated by Pauli to explain the
loss of energy in beta decay, they are detected from the Cherenkov radiation they emit at facilities such as
Super-Kamiokande, which typically consist of large tanks of chlorine or heavy water. They oscillate
between three flavors, which shows that they have non-zero but very low mass. For 10 points, name these
uncharged leptons that come in tau, muon, and electron varieties.
ANSWER: neutrinos [prompt on leptons before mentioned]
These particles have a namesake cosmic background with a temperature of about 1.9 K, and in the early
universe decoupling between these particles and baryonic matter occurred after the weak interaction rate
was slower than the expansion rate. The Homestake experiment was used to show they are capable of
changing their flavor, which can be described using the MNS matrix. Their existence was hypothesized as
means to preserve conservation of mass in beta decay. Tanks of a cadmium chloride solution and
photomultiplier tubes were used to detect them by Cowan and Reins. IceCube and Super-Kamiokande are
modern apparatus used to study, for 10 points, these neutral elementary particles that carry energy away
from annihilation reactions, that rarely interact with normal matter
ANSWER: neutrinos
The first team to detect this particle was led by Cowan and Reines. The discovery of flavor oscillations
resolved a deficit in the amount of one type of these particles coming from the Sun. All leptons have a
corresponding type of this particle. Wolfgang Pauli proposed these particles to resolve how the
conservation of momentum, energy and spin could be obeyed by beta decay. For 10 points, name these
nearly massless neutral particles.
ANSWER: neutrino
In the MSW effect, they experience coherent forward scattering in the presence of electrons, and their
production in nuclei is governed by the Gamow-Teller selection rules, including no change in nuclear
parity. Despite their slower velocities, ones from Supernova 1987a reached Earth before photons from the
same event because of their failure to interact electromagnetically on the way. With intrinsic spin virtually
always opposite their direction of travel, these "left-handed" candidate components of hot dark matter have
been shown to change flavors between the Sun and Earth and thus must have nonzero mass. Proposed by
Pauli to make beta decay satisfy conservation laws, for 10 points, what are these weakly-interacting low-mass 
lepton cousins of the tau, muon, and electron?
ANSWER: neutrinos (accept antineutrinos up to "opposite" and do not prompt thereafter: antineutrinos are right-handed, or with spin pointing in the direction of travel)
These particles are the subject of the MSW effect, and the Seesaw mechanism predicts a currently
undetected super-heavy one of these particles. The Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata matrix describes a particular
interaction of these particles, which was confirmed by the Homestake experiment. In addition to their flavor
oscillation, they emit Cerenkov radiation when passing through a detector like the Super-Kamiokande.
Originally posited to explain the conservation of energy and momentum during beta decay, they were
detected by Reins and Cowan using a reactor. FTP, name these leptons that come in tau, muon, and electron
flavors, created during annihilation reactions and with a name meaning "little neutral one".
ANSWER: Antineutrino
Cowan and Reines first provided experimental evidence for these particles in the Spectre Project.
They are observed at Sudbury via the Cherenkov radiation they cause when they interact. They were
found to oscillate between their three varieties at the Super-Kamiokande observatory, and these
particles have very small mass and rarely interact with matter. For 10 points, name these particles that
come in electron, muon, and tau varieties, and are leptons with no charge.
ANSWER: neutrinos
One experiment designed to study these particles took place in a mine in South Dakota and was headed by
Ray Davis, and the Super-Kamiokande in Japan detects these particles. These particles were the subject of
the Homestake Experiment, and they undergo flavor oscillations between their electron, muon, and tau
varieties. These particles were proposed by Pauli, and their name was changed due to the discovery of a
similarly named particle by James Chadwick. For 10 points, identify this chargeless particle whose name
indicates it is smaller than a neutron.
ANSWER: neutrinos
The Goesgen experiment used a nuclear reactor to observe their spectra. Experimental setups to study
these down to the 6.5 megavolt range usually only observe B8 products. Their dynamics show large and
small mixing angle solutions. Those dynamics are enhanced by the MSW mechanism. One method for
finding these makes use of large quantities of perchloroethylene such as in the Homestake experiment.
Research has shown that they can undergo flavor oscillations, and these half-integer spin particles are only
affected by the weak force. They were first postulated in the form of their antiparticles by Pauli. For 10
points, name these non-charge-carrying leptons of little mass involved in beta decay.
ANSWER: neutrinos
Current research is attempting to determine whether or not double-beta decay can occur without creating
this particle, which would mean that these are their own antiparticles. These particles can change flavor,
which is considered their oscillation. That change was verified at an observatory in Sudbury, Ontario in
2001, explaining why fewer of these were emitted by the sun than originally predicted and confirming that
these objects have mass. Clyde Cowan and Fred Reines discovered the first type, and it is now known that
there are three of these: tau, muon, and electron, so each of these three leptons is associated with one of the
other three leptons. Name these subatomic particles unaffected by the electromagnetic or strong force,
which makes them good at penetrating matter and difficult to detect.
ANSWER: neutrinos
The mass matrix of these particles has an eigenvalue on the Dirac scale, and another eigenvalue on the
Majorana scale; the balance between those eigenvalues explains the seesaw mechanism for their unusual
properties. A sine-squared of 2 theta term and a square of mass difference term are found in the equation
which predicts the probability density of their flavors; the switching of these particles between flavors is
called their namesake "oscillation." They were first postulated by Wolfgang Pauli, who sought to explain
the violation of energy conservation in beta decay. For 10 points, identify these particles which come in the
"electron," "muon," and "tau" varieties, and which are known to be extremely light.
ANSWER: neutrino
Both Dirac and Majorana masses are used to model these particles in the seesaw mechanism, suggesting
that a superheavy "sterile" type may exist. The Homestake experiment attempted to count these particles.
The PMNS matrix describes their namesake flavor oscillations. These particles were first proposed by
Wolfgang Pauli to account for the loss of energy during beta decay. They are detected by the SuperKamiokande observatory. For 10 points, name these charge-less leptons that come in electron, muon, and
tau varieties.
ANSWER: neutrinos
Approximately one second after the Big Bang, these particles greatly reduced their interactions with
baryons, a time known as their decoupling, and they now interact almost exclusively through the weak
force. The antiparticle corresponding to this particle was discovered by Cowan and Reines by observing its
interactions with protons to create neutrons and positrons. The three types of this lepton are the tau, the
muon, and the electron types. Name these elementary subatomic particles that are very good at passing
through matter.
ANSWER: neutrinos
An experiment at Brookhaven studied these particles by bubbling helium through a solution of carbon
tetrachloride to remove the argon-37 that had formed from collisions between chlorine-37 and these
particles. In Project Poltergeist, Cowan and Reines studied the reaction of its antiparticles with protons to
yield neutrons and beta plus particles, thus first proving its existence. This subatomic particle was
postulated to solve conservation of energy and momentum in beta decay, and one of these is released during
electron capture. Also the focus of the Super-Kamiokande facility, this is, for 10 points what chargeless
lepton, which comes in electron, muon, and tauon varieties.
ANSWER: neutrinos
Kusenko and Segre demonstrated that these particles could explain pulsar kicks. Taking the
determinant of a matrix with elements zero, Dirac mass, Dirac mass, Majorana mass gives the mass
of an as yet undiscovered form of this particle as the larger root by the "seesaw" mechanism. Warm
dark matter may be composed of that "sterile" type of this particle, and the PMNS matrix predicts their
flavor oscillations. They were first proposed by Wolfgang Pauli as a method of preserving conservation of
mass and momentum in beta decay, and the Super-Kamiokande device detects them. For 10 points, name
these leptons with tau, muon, and electron flavors.
ANSWER: neutrino
Combining observations of these from reactors with prior data from SNO confirms the Large Mixing Angle
hypothesis for these. These results from KamLAND improved upon previous measurements of the solar
variety of these by Super-K, showing definite flavor oscillation. They make up most of the energy radiated
in a supernova, and observations of the 1987A supernova showed that these arrived before the first photons,
perhaps resulting from the fact that they are affected only by the weak force. For 10 points, name these
particles which come in tau, muon, and electron varieties and which were first postulated by Pauli to allow
conservation of energy and momentum in beta decay.
ANSWER: neutrino
The absence of these particles from double beta decay is being investigated by EXO. These particles were
detected by IMB following Supernova 1987A. An experiment by Raymond Davis and John Bahcall led to a
problem named for these particles that arose because one-third the predicted number of these particles were
detected. Faulty wiring used in the OPERA experiment may have caused a controversial reading of their
speed. Interacting via gravity and the weak force, these particles undergo flavor oscillation and have muon
and tau varieties. For 10 points, name these extremely light leptons detected moving faster than the speed of
light in 2011.
ANSWER: neutrinos
This particle was first detected Cowan and Reines. The first experiment to detect one type of this
particle, the Homestake experiment, only observed roughly one-third as many as expected. That
discrepancy was known as this particle's solar problem, which was reconciled by the observation that
they can oscillate between their tau, muon and electron flavors. These particles were first proposed
by (*) Pauli to explain the missing momentum in beta decay. For 10 points, name these nearly massless,
neutral particles that the OPERA experiment measured travelling faster than the speed of light in September
2011.
ANSWER: neutrinos
An unusually low number of these particles emitted from the sun led to the discovery that they can
undergo oscillation among their muon, electron, and tau flavors, and they were first proposed by
Wolfgang (*) Pauli in order to conserve mass and momentum in beta decay. Detection of these particles
can function as an early warning system for the occurance of a supernova, and they are detected at the
Super-Kamiokande and Sudbury observatories. For 10 points, name this particle, once thought to be
massless, that easily passes through matter.
ANSWER: neutrino
Their interaction with a neutron results in the exchange of a W minus particle, thus producing a
proton, and they were detected in radiation from Supernova 1987A by the Super Kamiokande reactor.
Their existence was proposed by Wolfgang Pauli, to account for the missing energy during a beta decay
process, and they exist in muon, tau, and electron varieties. Represented by the letter nu, for 10 points,
identify these uncharged particles known for having a very high velocity and a low mass.
ANSWER: neutrinos
These particles are found in muon, tau, and electron varieties, and their existence was originally
proposed to maintain conservation of energy, momentum, and angular momentum in beta decay. These
particles are affected by the weak force, and devices built to examine this particle must be very large
because it is notably difficult to detect. For 10 points, name this subatomic particle whose name suggests
that it is smaller than a neutron.
ANSWER: neutrino
The MSW effect accounts for this particle's oscillations in matter as opposed to a vacuum, and its "sterile"
variety is a strong candidate for dark matter composition. The Homestake experiment attempted to count
these particles emitted due to fusion in the Sun, while Cowan and Reines reacted its antiparticles with
protons to yield neutrons and beta plus particles to verify this particle's existence. Studied at the SuperKamiokande facility, this particle was postulated to allow conservation of energy and momentum in beta
decay, which involves its electron type. Also coming in muon and tauon varieties, for 10 points name this
chargeless lepton whose name means "small neutral one."
ANSWER: neutrino
Bruno Pontecorvo predicted a phenomenon governing changes in the superposition of these particles- flavor
and mass states. These particles have been hypothesized to be their own antiparticles, implying the
possibility of double beta decay without their involvement. One experiment investigating these particles-
phenomenon of flavor oscillation detected them at a laboratory in Gran Sasso. The Super-Kamiokande and
the Homestake Mine were both home to major experiments attempting to detect these particles produced by
the sun. For 10 points, name these tiny, weakly interacting particles, named for the fact that they have no
charge.
ANSWER: neutrinos [do not accept "neutron"; accept electron neutrinos, muon neutrinos, or tau neutrinos]
An burst of them important for research was released by Supernova 1987A. A team led by Arthur
McDonald solved the discrepancy between other experimental results and a model created by Bahcall, and
an experiment by Wu showed that these are almost always left-handed. They were first proposed by Pauli to
explain an apparent loss of energy observed in beta decay. One method of detecting them uses the fact that
these particles can convert chlorine to argon via the charged current interaction, and another method relies
on heavy water. Notable detectors of them include the Homestake Mine, Sudbury, and Super Kamiokande.
For 10 points, name these nearly massless uncharged leptons which come in tauon, muon, and electron
flavors.
ANSWER: neutrinos
The eigenvalues of the mass matrix of these entities on the Dirac and Majorana scales explain the seesaw
mechanism. One second after the Big Bang, a cosmic background of these particles formed. The CowanReines experiment confirmed a hypothesis by Pauli, who postulated the existence of these particles to
explain a disparity in the conservation of energy in beta decay. Lack of these particles coming from the sun
led to the finding that these leptons oscillate between electron, muon, and tau flavors. A faulty cable led to
OPERA's spurious detection of these particles moving faster than light. Enrico Fermi named, for ten points,
what "small and neutral" particle?
ANSWER: neutrinos
A gas of these non-photon things with a temperature of less than 2 kelvins is thought to permeate the
universe. A hypothetical right-handed one of these things may be a significant contributor to dark matter if
it is "sterile." The width of the Z boson decay provides the tightest bounds on the number of types of these
things, and elastic scattering among them is also mediated by the Z boson. The Standard Model fails to
account for one non-gravitational behavior of these leptons, in which their flavors vary over time; that
phenomenon, characterized by the PMNS matrix, is called "oscillation." An "anti" version of one of these
elementary particles is emitted in beta decay. For 10 points, name these incredibly light uncharged particles
that barely interact with anything.
ANSWER: neutrinos [accept electron neutrinos; accept muon neutrinos; accept tau neutrinos]
The majority of these were created during the first few fractions of a second after the big bang, when the
universe was comprised of elementary particles. These particles were first postulated to preserve
conservation of energy, conservation of momentum, and conservation of angular momentum in beta decay.
Although their speed was generally assumed to be equal to the speed of light, MINOS detectors have since
found the value to be much smaller. These particles are spawned from background radiation, the interaction
of cosmic rays with the Earth's atmosphere, and nuclear fusion. Their existence was postulated by Wolfgang
Pauli in 1930, and their name was coined by Enrico Fermi. FTP, name this chareless particle which can be
found in 3 distinct flavors: electron, muon, and tau.
ANSWER: Neutrino
One parameter that describes this phenomenon will be measured in the T2K experiment, and an
anomalous result at the LSND about this phenomenon was refuted by the MiniBooNE experiment at
Fermilab. The original experiment that detected this phenomenon bubbled helium gas through a tank
every few days in order to collect samples of radioactive Argon from a giant take of
perchloroethylene; that experiment was performed by Davis in the Homestake Mine and confirmed in
the Sudbury Observatory. In matter, this phenomenon occurs due to electrons scattering the subject
particles, known as the MSW effect, and this phenomenon is described by a set of three mixing angles in the
Maki-Nagakawa-Sagata matrix. This phenomenon was originally postulated because detectors showed that
the sun produced only one-third the predicted amount of a certain particle. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which the namesake particles created by annihilation cycle between three flavor states.
ANSWER: neutrino flavor oscillations or neutrino oscillations
The likelihood of this effect in one particle in which it occurs is increased by current coherent
scattering in regions of non-zero current density, since such scattering effectively increases the mass
of that particle. The experimental differentiation of charged-current and neutral-current reactions
lead to the first postulation of this behavior. This behavior is possible because its effected particles
propagate as mass eigenstates distinct from the eigenstates of the property changed by this behavior;
that property couples the particles that undergo this to the weak interaction. First experimentally
confirmed by monitoring output from the (*) KamLAND reactors, this behavior happens more often in
matter according to the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein effect and is the reason that first results from the
GALLEX, Sudbury, Homestake, and Super-Kamiokande experiments underestimated the solar flux of the
particles that undergo it. For 10 points, identify this variation in the type of certain light, neutral leptons.
ANSWER: neutrino flavor oscillations [accept neutrino flavor oscillations, neutrino flavor changes, or other close equivalents; prompt on neutrino changes or other close equivalents that don-t use the word "oscillation"]
These particles are captured in the s-process of asymptotic giant branch stars. The namesake activation
analysis of these particles determines the identity and quantity of elements in a sample. The beta decay of
these spin one-half baryons results in the emission of a proton, an electron, and an antineutrino. Nuclear
power plants use these particles to bombard uranium-235 and induce a chain reaction. These particles
consist of an up quark and two down quarks, and they were discovered by James Chadwick. The number of
these particles in an atom determines its isotope. For 10 points, name these chargeless particles that are
found together with protons in the nucleus.
ANSWER: neutrons
They can be scattered to find the properties of YBCO high temperature superconductors such as the
position of the oxygen atoms and the behavior of the magnetic fields inside because they have a non-
zero magnetic dipole moment. The Larmor precession frequency for parallel and antiparallel electric
and magnetic fields is used to measure this particle's electric dipole moment, which, if discovered,
would help solve the strong CP problem. That dipole moment should exist because this particle is
composed of smaller charged particles. Heisenberg proposed isospin as a conserved quantity after
noticing that this particle and a (*) charged particle have nearly the same mass. More generally, hot,
thermal, and cold versions of these particles are often used in scattering. These baryons are made of two
down quarks and one up quark, and they can decay into an electron, neutrino, and a proton in beta decay.
For 10 points, name this uncharged nucleon with a mass similar to the proton.
ANSWER: neutron
The "cold" varieties of these particles can be produced using liquid deuterium, and are used for measuring
their scattering. They can be detected by gas proportional detectors filled with helium-3. They are used in
NAA and PGAA to determine the elemental composition of a sample. PT symmetry would be violated by
the existence of a dipole moment for these particles that are produced in spallation. One of their down
quarks changes to an up quark in beta minus decay. Isotopes have the same number of protons but different
numbers of, for 10 points, these particles with no electric charge.
ANSWER: neutrons
The Fermi pseudopotential describes the scattering of these particles. SU(5) and SO(10) Grand
Unified Theories predict a yet-unobserved oscillation between this particle and its antiparticle. These
particles can be generated from spallation sources. Matter-antimatter asymmetry would be
explained by a relatively large value of its electron dipole moment, which is also a measure of CP
violation. These particles were originally discovered in an experiment in which they hit a layer of
paraffin wax after being knocked out of (*) beryllium; that experiment was conducted by Chadwick.
This particle consists of two down quarks and one up quark, and changing the number of these particles
creates different isotopes. For 10 points, name this neutral particle in the nucleus.
ANSWER: neutron
Fusors can eject beams of these particles, which are often produced from a spallation source. These
particles have magnetic moment equal to 1.9 times the nuclear magneton, but it is unknown whether
or not their electric dipole moment is zero. Boron-10 is very able to (*) "capture" these particles, which
are composed of two down and one up quark. A nuclear chain reaction depends on the release of these
particles, and they were discovered by James Chadwick. For ten points, identify these 1 atomic mass unit
particles which have no charge.
ANSWER: neutrons
These entities are used by the Multi-Axis Crystal Spectrometer to determine atomic arrangements, and
security systems may soon detect explosives by measuring the scattering of these particles. A gamma ray is
emitted in their namesake capture. When isolated, these hadrons break down in about 15 minutes; they are
also fired to cause fission, and produced to sustain that chain reaction. A type of baryon, they consist of an
up and two down quarks. Name these particles, the more massive of the two nucleons, discovered in 1932
by James Chadwick and with no charge.
ANSWER: neutrons
A form of small angle scattering often used in tandem with small angle x-ray scattering uses these
particles to analyze structures on the order of nanometers. The asymmetry term in the liquid drop model is
taken account when there is an overabundance of these particles. They can be captured rapidly in the
R-process or more slowly in the S-process. Magnetars are a class of stars composed of these particles that
are kept from collapsing by quantum degeneracy pressure. Control rods are composed of elements that can
effectively absorb this particle. In beta minus decay, one of these particles decay into an electron and an
electron antineutrino. For 10 points, name this particle discovered by James Chadwick found in the nucleus
alongside the proton.
ANSWER: neutron
Bruce Cork discovered the antiparticle partner for this particle in 1956, 24 years after James Chadwick
discovered this particle itself in 1932. A free version of this particle has a mean lifetime of just under 15
minutes. A flavor change via a W boson from a down quark to an up quark causes this particle to decay,
during which it produces an electron antineutrino, an electron, and another type of nucleon. The number of
this particle in an atom determines the isotope of an element. For 10 points, identify this subatomic particle,
slightly heavier than the proton, that has zero charge.
ANSWER: neutron
These particles make up the humorously named "Swiss cheese" and "spaghetti" phases in certain stars.
These particles consist of two down quarks and an up quark and are the heavier of two common baryonic
hadrons. This particle may emit electron antineutrinos and electrons to become a proton in the process of
(*) beta decay. These particles were discovered in 1932 by James Chadwick. Nuclear fission involves
bombardment of nuclei with these particles, and the number of these particles is the difference between the
atomic mass and the atomic number. For 10 points, name this heavier of the two particles in the nucleus, a
particle with neutral charge.
ANSWER: neutron
These objects are roughly 1.5 times as common as their counterparts among substances in the
hypothetical "island of stability". These particles, which consist of two down quarks and an up quark,
release an antineutrino when they decay, which happens with a half-life of about 10 minutes. Discovered
by James Chadwick in 1932, they contribute to the mass number, but not the atomic number, of an element.
For 10 points, name this elementary particle with no electric charge, found in the nucleus along with the
proton.
ANSWER: neutron
These particles were used in a spectroscopy technique pioneered by Bertram Brockhouse, and Bruce Cork
discovered their antiparticles while at LBNL. Formed by beta-plus decay or electron capture, these particles
contain one up-quark and two down-quarks. Slow-moving ones can strike an atom to initiate a fission
reaction. For 10 points, name these particles, first discovered by James Chadwick, that are located in the
atomic nucleus and lack charge.
ANSWER: neutrons
The CryoEDM experiment is attempting to place an upper bound on a certain property of this
particle; that property of this particle is predicted to be under 2.9 times 10 to the negative 26
electron-charge-centimeters by the Standard Model. In supernovae, nucleosynthesis occurs via the
capture of these particles in the R and S processes. CP violation contributes to this particle's
aforementioned electric dipole moment. Water is commonly used to transform fast ones into thermal
ones in a nuclear reactor. They consist of two down quarks and one up quark, and in beta-minus decay
these particles transform into an electron and a proton. Isotopes differ in the number of, for 10 points, these
neutral particles found in the nuclei of most elements.
ANSWER: Neutron
Bertram Brockhouse and Clifford Shull developed scattering techniques named for these particles. The
measurement of the electric dipole moment of these particles is the goal of the CryoEDM project. These
baryons consist of two down quarks and one up quark. Boron is used in control rods to absorb these
particles and regulate the rate of fission. James Chadwick discovered these particles, which are converted
into protons during beta minus decay. Isotopes differ in the number of these particles. For 10 points, name
these uncharged particles located in the nucleus.
ANSWER: neutrons
Francisco-Miguel Marques has hypothesized a stable cluster of four of these particles, which
consist of two down quarks and one up quark. When these particles are in free space they rapidly
undergo beta decay and have an average lifespan of about fifteen minutes. Discovered in 1932 by
James (*) Chadwick, the number of these particles determines the isotope of an element, and their number
is included in atomic mass but not atomic number. For 10 points, name this subatomic particle with no net
electric charge, slightly heavier than a proton.
ANSWER: neutron
Supersymmetry predicts a much larger value than the standard model for this particle's electric
dipole moment. These particles undergo a decay process involving the emission of a W-minus boson,
lasting only around fifteen minutes in their free form. That process is beta-minus decay, and nuclear
fission occurs via (*) bombardment by these particles. They consist of an up quark and two down quarks
and were discovered by James Chadwick in 1932, helping to explain atomic mass. For 10 points, name
these uncharged particles, found with protons in the atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: neutrons
The cryoEDM and nEDM experiments will use measurements of this particle in an attempt to
explain CP violation, and two of these non-electron particles are emitted when beryllium-16 decays.
Uranium fission releases three of these particles, which can then drive a chain reaction. This particle
can undergo beta decay into a (*) proton, electron, and antineutrino via the weak force, and it was
discovered by James Chadwick. For 10 points, identify this uncharged subatomic particle which forms part
of the atomic nuclei.
ANSWER: neutron
Enrico Fermi proposed that an atom's preferred mode of beta decay depends on whether it has too many or
too few of these particles, which are often ejected during spontaneous fission. Carbon-14 dating makes use
of the decay of one of these particles, which consists of one up and two down quarks. The number of them
in
the nucleus is equal to the difference between atomic mass and atomic number. For 10 points, name these
particles discovered by James Chadwick, which are slightly heavier than protons and electrically neutral.
ANSWER: neutrons
Experiments by Francisco-Miguel Marques et al. suggested the possibility of a stable cluster of four of
them. Brockhouse developed a method of spectroscopy using these particles, and work leading to their
discovery showed that beryllium rays could remove particles from paraffin wax and was performed by the
Joliot-Curies. An antineutrino is released when these undergo a certain type of decay, and free ones have a
lifetime of approximately fifteen minutes. They undergo beta-minus decay, and are created by electron
capture. Discovered in 1932 by James Chadwick, for 10 points, name this electrically neutral subatomic
particle, found in the nucleus with protons.
ANSWER: neutrons
Oak Ridge National Laboratory has a facility for to generate these particles by spallation. The s and r
processes in stars involve the capture of these particles. This particle was discovered by James Chadwick.
They consist of two down and one up quark. Fast and thermal ones collide with nuclei to trigger a nuclear
fission event. Isotopes of an element differ in the number of these. For 10 points, name these particles that
along with protons are found in the nucleus.
ANSWER: neutron
If this particle's electric dipole moment is nonzero, it would violate both parity and time reversal
symmetry. Beryllium-5 undergoes a type of decay in which this particle is released, and this particle was
originally discovered in an experiment in which paraffin wax was bombarded with them, performed by
James Chadwick. Consisting of two down and one up quark, this particle has a mass of 1.008 atomic mass
units. Changing the number of these particles results in a new isotope. For 10 points, name this particle
found in the nucleus, the neutral counterpart of the proton.
ANSWER: neutron
The ISIS facility, at Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Oxfordshire, United Kingdom, is a source for
muons and these particles. Its antiparticle was discovered by Bruce Cork, and the R-process and S-process
are different ways in which they can be captured by a nucleus. These particles, when free, undergo beta
decay with a mean lifetime of about 15 minutes. Made up of one up quark and two down quarks, it was
discovered by James Chadwick. FTP, identify this particle whose number differs in different isotopes of the
same element, a subatomic particle with zero charge.
ANSWER: neutrons
Bonner spheres are used to determine their energy spectra, and high energy resolution can be achieved by a
type of spin echo spectroscopy involving these particles. The R-process and S-process are two ways in
which they can be captured. These particles are produced in spallation, and their speed is moderated by
heavy water or graphite. Three of them are produced in the fission of uranium-236, and they are composed
of two down quarks and one up quark. The number of these particles equals the mass number minus the
atomic number. For 10 points, name these subatomic particles with zero charge.
ANSWER: neutrons
This particle was discovered in an experiment in which alpha particles caused the disintegration of
beryllium. Crystal structures can be determined through a technique known as this particle's "scattering."
This common catalyst for fission reactions is composed of one up quark and two down quarks. The number
of these particles in an atom equals the difference of atomic mass and atomic number. For 10 points, name
these subatomic particles found in the nucleus, which, unlike protons, have no charge.
ANSWER: neutron
The ISIS and SNS facilities produce these particles using spallation, and a nonzero electric dipole moment
would imply the violation of CPT theorem. Certain objects composed of these particles obey the Tolman-
Oppeheimer-Volkov limit, whose antiparticle having a mass of 940 MeV was discovered by Bruce Cork.
When free, this particle has a lifetime of about 15 minutes and decays into an antineutrino, an electron and a
proton, and it is a baryon made up of two down quarks and one up quark. Discovered by James Chadwick,
for 10 points, identify this neutral subatomic particle.
ANSWER: neutron
Bodmer, Terazawa, and Witten hypothesized these objects may be made of strange matter.
Antikaons may form a Bose condensate in these objects. The relationship between their density and
mass is given by their equation of state, which includes constraints like the percentage of the moment
of inertia contributed from the outer part of the envelope of these objects. Vela is one of these objects
that exhibit both "spaghetti" and "Swiss cheese" phases under their surfaces. Although not (*) white
dwarfs, the Urca process is assumed to be responsible for their cooling. Thought to form from the core
collapse of stars undergoing type-II supernovae, these stars have their mass capped at about three solar
masses, or the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. Two types of these stars are magnetars and pulsars. For
10 points, name these stars that are largely composed of their namesake uncharged particles.
ANSWER: neutron stars [anti-prompt on magnetars or pulsars before mentioned]
AXPs and SGRs are probably a type of these objects with a strong magnetic field. Crust adjustments lead to
starquakes in these objects, which increase in rotational speed during spin-ups and glitches. With a mass
bounded by the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, these stars are usually remnants of a core-collapse
supernova. Magnetars are a subtype of one kind, which rotates rapidly and emits a pulse of electromagnetic
radiation; that subtype is the pulsar. Held together by the degeneracy pressure of a certain subatomic
particle, for 10 points, name this type of star composed of its namesake uncharged nucleon.
ANSWER: neutron stars [prompt on magnetar or pulsar before mentioned]
The UU equation of state was created to model these systems and predicts sufficient charge density to
allow an energy-loss mechanism proposed to explain these systems and consisting of a two-step cycle
that nets two neutrinos; that cooling process is called an Urca process. One of these in Circinus is the
cause of the bizarre "Hand of God structure," while the rotation of these objects can power plerions.
The severe deformation of atomic orbitals near one sub-class of these objects leads to an effect called
(*) whiskering. When these objects are observed from a pole-on perspective, they exhibit periodically
spatially coherent electromagnetic radition in the so-called "lighthouse effect," which led to their initial
designation of "Little Green Men." Kept from collapse by nucleon degeneracy pressure , FTP, identify these
stars limited in mass to about three solar masses, whose varieties include magnetars and pulsars.
ANSWER: neutron stars or pulsars [accept specific buzzes like magnetars before mentioned, etc; accept neutron degenerate matter or other close equivalents before "plerions"]
The surface of these celestial objects is a solid lattice of nuclei in which "starquakes" can occur,
causing these objects to spin faster. If they emit electromagnetic radiation, their spinning causes the
radiation to be observed at (*) regular intervals and these entities are known as pulsars. The core of a
supernova can become, for 10 points, what type of very small, super-dense star named for a subatomic
particle?
ANSWER: neutron star (prompt on magnetar or pulsar before mentioned; do not accept neutron)
The first exoplanets were discovered orbiting a sub-type of these objects. Star quakes in their crust
cause glitches in these objects. Ones with unusually strong magnetic fields are called magnetars.
Their mass is bounded above by the (*) Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit and they were originally
discovered in Scorpius. The one in the Vulpecula was mistaken for "Little Green Men,", but was later
determined to be a pulsar, a sub-type of these objects. These objects are the remains of core-collapse
supernovae and are composed of a namesake degenerate gas. For 10 points, name these celestial objects that
are composed of uncharged particles that are normally found in atomic nuclei.
ANSWER: neutron star [accept pulsar before "magnetars", do NOT accept magnetar early]
Quakes in the crusts of these stars may be the source of gamma-ray bursts from soft gamma repeaters, a
subclass of these stars which may have tremendous magnetic fields, making them magnetars. Above
approximately two solar masses, these stars may turn into strange stars. The core of the Crab Nebula, which
formed from SN 1054, is one of these stars. The decay in the orbit of a binary of these stars provides
indirect evidence for gravitational radiation; one of those two stars emits highly periodic radiation, making
it a pulsar. For 10 points, name these very dense stars which are named for the uncharged subatomic
particles which compose their cores.
ANSWER: neutron stars [accept pulsars until it is read; accept magnetars until it is read; accept soft gamma repeaters until it is read]
Irregularly-emitting variants of these objects are known as RRATs. The first-known eclipsing
binary involving one type of these objects harbors a brown dwarf and one of these known as the
"Black Widow." Soft gamma repeaters are believed to be another sub-type of these celestial objects.
Star quakes are thought to cause increases in rotational speed known as glitches in these objects,
whose existence was hypothesized by (*) Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky. One type of these objects is
found at the center of the Crab Nebula. Like white dwarves, they are held in hydrostatic equilibrium by
degeneracy pressure. For 10 points, name these objects that result from core-collapse supernovae, named
for the chargeless particle found in atomic nuclei.
ANSWER: neutron star [or pulsar; anti-prompt on "magnetar"]
At increasing depths, their structure is expected to follow what has been dubbed the "pasta-antipasta
sequence," as particles group first into meatball-like clumps, then spaghetti-like strands, then lasagna-like
sheets. Their atmosphere is approximately one meter thick, below which is a predominantly iron crust.
Anomalies in their rotation speeds are called glitches and are thought to be caused by starquakes. Their
existence, first predicted by Zwicky, had strong existence provided by the discovery of the first pulsar in by
Jocelyn Bell and Anthony Hewish. Predicted to form when a star's core mass exceeds the Chandrasekhar
limit, but is less than about three solar masses, FTP name these rapidly spinning remains of supergiants.
ANSWER: neutron stars
These stars sometimes undergo sudden increases in rotation speed called glitches. These stars
experience starquakes. Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky proposed the existence of these stars. The
mass of these stars is bounded by the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, and they are formed from
the core collapse of stars surpassing the (*) Chandrasekhar limit. Subclasses of this type of star include
magnetars and pulsars. For 10 points, name this type of star composed of namesake neutral particles.
ANSWER: neutron stars [accept pulsars before "Fritz Zwicky" and prompt afterwards; prompt on stars]
These objects can experience a sudden spin-up or "glitch" when their crusts crack during a starquake,
reducing their equatorial radii. It is thought that soft gamma repeaters are one type of these objects that are
characterized by having gigatesla magnetic fields. A binary system of these was first discovered in 1974 and
provided indirect evidence for gravitational radiation. They are slightly less-dense than quark stars, and
form from core-collapse supernovae in stars under approximately 10 solar masses. For 10 points, name
these stars that are composed of and named for a certain nuclear particle.
ANSWER: neutron stars [prompt on "pulsars" or "magnetars"] <
Because of the intense pressure of their formation, they have crystalline cores, and in that formation process
they undergo Pomeranchuk cooling. The upper limit to their mass is the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff
limit , and Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky first proposed the existence of them. Well-known examples
include the ones discovered by Jocelyn Bell and Anthony Hewish in the center of Crab Nebula and CP
1919, both of which are of the variety of it that emits electromagnetic radiation. Their lower limit is the
Chandrasekhar limit, below which they collapse into black holes. For 10 points, name this type of star,
usually the remains of a supernova.
ANSWER: neutron star
An equation named for Lattimer and Swesty is used to model these objects in calculations involving
two or more, while the Akmal-Pandharipande-Ravenhall equation of state models their dissipation of
energy through the Urca process. These objects contain "swiss cheese" and "spaghetti" phases
between their crust and outer cores. The March 5 event saw a hard spike of gamma ray radiation
from a (*) soft gamma-ray repeater, thought to be this type of star. These stars occasionally "glitch," but
generally spin down through magnetic braking, and their upper mass limit of approximately three solar
masses is the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. For 10 points, pulsars are a type of what stars that are
formed when stars between 8 and 20 solar masses undergo a supernova, and are composed entirely of a
certain particle?
ANSWER: neutron stars [accpet pulsars before mentioned]
Holes in these objects are known as anti-meatball, anti-spaghetti, or anti-lasagna, depending on
density, and the upper bound to their mass is given by the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkov limit. Upon
reaching a density of approximately 400 billion grams per cubic centimeter, white dwarfs may begin to
turn into them. First discovered in standalone form by Jocelyn Bell, for 10 points, name these extremely
dense stars often formed as a result of supernovae, which contain lots of the namesake neutrallycharged
subatomic particle.
ANSWER: neutron stars
A pair of equations governing these objects has a solution named for Buchdahl. Latimer showed that
the equation of state for one form of these objects is soft at low density and stiff at high density.
These objects exhibition a phase transition from a spaghetti phase to a Swiss cheese phase when
moving towards the core. Gamow and Scheonberg postulated a mechanism by which these stars
would emit a neutrino to cool, known as the Urca process. These objects are postulated to have an
outer core that consists of a Fermi liquid, while their core composition is unknown. The fact that their
crusts are very stiff means that when these objects slow their rotation, the crust quickly adjusts in a
starquake. The upper limit of these object's mass is postulated to be between 1.5 to 2 solar masses, a value
known as the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. They form when the core of a star collapses during a
supernova. For 10 points, name these dense stars made of a namesake neutral particle
ANSWER: Neutron Stars
They are only found in masses between the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit and the Chandrasekhar
limit. Their existence was proposed by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky in 1933 to explain how their
formation could release the energy necessary to power supernovas. The first was discovered in 1965 as a
bright radio source in the Crab Nebula, the remnants of the supernova of AD 1054. For10 points, name
these massive, extremely dense stellar remnants created as massive stars collapse, a process only stopped by
the degeneracy pressure of their nuclear particles.
ANSWER: Neutron stars
A group of these objects close to Earth are known as the magnificent seven. One form of these objects
is found at the center of the Crab nebula, while one class of these objects are known as * magnetars.
The upper limit of these objects, kept from collapsing by the Pauli exclusion principle, are in the
range of 2 to 3 solar masses, defined by the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. Forms of these objects
that rotate rapidly and emit electromagnetic radiation are known as pulsars. For 10 points, name this type of
star that forms from the collapse of a supernova, known for their extremely dense nature.
ANSWER: neutron star (prompt on "pulsar" before magnetar)
This unit is multiplied by meters per kilogram squared in the universal gravitational constant, and
by meters per Coulomb squared in the Coulomb constant. Electric field strength is measured in this
unit per Coulomb. Impulse is expressed by this unit times a second, and torque by it times a (*)
meter. This unit can be expressed as a product of mass and acceleration, making it equivalent to one
kilogram times one meter per second squared. For 10 points, name this unit used to measure force.
ANSWER: Newtons [or kilogram per meter per second squared until it read; prompt on force]
This scientist was close friends with a Genevan-born mathematician who developed a method of
drilling holes in rubies; that man, Fatio de Duillier, was derisively nicknamed "the ape of [this man]."
A surviving manuscript shows this man computing the area of a hyperbola to 55 decimal places. The
Philosophical Transactions describes his discovery that white light is formed by a (*) spectrum of
different colors. This scientist responded to allegations of plagiarism by Robert Hooke by claiming "If I
have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants." This scientist used the term "method of
fluxions" to describe differential calculus, which he discovered independently of Leibniz. For 10 points,
name this scientist who formulated three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
This man used the phrase Hypotheses non fingo in a response to criticisms of his Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica, a book in which he published his Universal Law of Gravitation. For 10 points,
what English scientist was inspired to develop a theory of gravitation after watching an apple fall from a
tree?
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
A thought experiment attributed to this person involved a cannon on top of a mountain. This person is
the namesake of the relationship making heat loss proportional to the temperature difference between
an object and its environment. Generally credited with building the first useful reflecting telescope,
he explained why Kepler's laws of planetary motion are true in his Principia [prin-KIP-ee-uh], which
also included this man's law of universal gravitation. Name this scientist whose three laws of motion
are a basis of classical physics, the namesake of the SI unit of force.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
By using two prisms in series to split light into its constituent colors and recombine them, this
scientist became the first to show that color was due to light alone. This scientist championed the
corpuscular theory of light in his Opticks. He co-discovered differential (*) calculus with Leibniz. In his
most famous work, he derived Kepler's laws from his three laws of motion. For 10 points, name this
scientist who described universal gravitation in his Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
John Dollond disproved this man's assumption that the refractive and dispersive properties of a substance
are related. Another of his theories was initially discarded because his calculations used an inaccurate value
for the radius of the Earth. He demonstrated that white light was made up of many component colors, and,
like Charles Coulomb, developed an inverse square law. Voltaire started the legend that, for the point, what
man was inspired to develop a law of universal gravitation after an apple fell on his head?
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
This man's study of the three body problem was published in his most famous work. The rate of a body's
heat loss is proportional to the difference in the body's temperature and the surrounding temperature in his
namesake Law of Cooling. Besides inventing calculus at the same time as Leibniz, he also published a
work about prisms and color, Optics. For 10 points, name this scientist, who wrote Principia, and probably
discovered gravity by watching an apple fall down.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
A modification of one of this man's theories is the basis for a Mordecai Milgrom theory which was
weakened by the observation of the Bullet Cluster. He is the namesake of fringes which arise from
the combination of rays reflected from a flat plate and a convex lens; those are his namesake "rings."
The Ehrenfest Theorem is a generalization of one law named for him. Another statement named for
him indicates that the (*) rate of heat loss for a body is proportional to the difference in temperature
between the body and its surroundings. For 10 points, identify this author of Principia Mathematica, the
namesake of a law of cooling and three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
One of this thinker's late works was a hilariously awful attempt to prove that Solomon was the first
kingand that his temple was the first temple ever built. In a letter to Richard Bentley, this man
discussed the possibility of "action at a distance." In addition to writing The Chronology of Ancient
Kingdoms, this man was attacked in a letter addressed to the Royal Society by Robert Boyle for
supposing that light is a body propagating from a source. He came to the conclusion that God would
not exist if physical space did not exist, because it is an emanative effect of the first being, in his (*)
De Graviatone. George Berkeley (bark LEE) attacked this man's method of fluxions in The Analyst. For 10
points, name this author of Principia Mathematica, who discovered calculus independently of Leibniz and
formulated three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
This man derived solutions to the Diophantine Equations by using coordinate geometry, and he is credited
with the generalized binomial theorem. In one theory, this man predicted that Saturn would slow down upon
passing Jupiter, and he discovered that white light was made up of colored particles. One of his namesake
laws states that the an object's rate of temperature change is proportional to the difference between the
temperature of the object and that of its surroundings. In addition to naming a law of cooling, this man
wrote Principia Mathematica. For 10 points, name this scientist who devised three namesake laws of
motion.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
This man used the phrase Hypotheses non fingo in a response to criticisms of his Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica, a book in which he published his Universal Law of Gravitation. For 10 points,
what English scientist was inspired to develop a theory of gravitation after watching an apple fall from a
tree?
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
With Cotes, this man names a set of methods for numerical integration, including the trapezoid rule. One
constant sometimes named for him in an equation derived by him was determined using a torsion balance in
the Cavendish experiment. For shallow temperature gradients, his law of cooling approximates heat flow
between two points as proportional to the temperature difference between them. When the de Broglie
wavelength is small, a set of laws named for this man hold; one of those laws states that force is equal to
mass times acceleration. For 10 points, name this namesake of the SI unit of force and three laws of motion
that underlie classical mechanics.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
This scientist wrote "The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms," which suggests his belief in Atlantis. He
proposed that light was made up of corpuscles in his work Opticks. William Stukeley wrote about this man
being in the garden where he wondered why a certain object descended perpendicularly to the ground. His
most important theories are described in his 1687 work known as Principia. For 10 points, name this
English physicist who theorized universal gravitation and proposed three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
One work by this man was revised to include an essay entitled General Scholium, in which this man
famously stated "I frame no hypothesis." The Cavendish experiment confirmed the value of a constant first
proposed by this man, who names a law that is used to find an object's impulse. The conservation of
momentum was derived from another law named for this man which states that every action has an opposite
and equal reaction. For 10 points, identify this British pioneer of calculus who famously formulated three
laws of motion.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
This man names the ringed pattern produced by a convex lens pressed against a flat plate, along with some
formulas with Robert Cotes. His namesake "cradle" demonstrates the conservation of momentum, and he
showed that white light is a mixture of colored light in his Opticks. A kilogram-meter per second squared is
named after this man, the SI unit of force. His inverse square law of universal gravitation was described in
Principia Mathematica, along with three laws of motion. For 10 points, name this British physicist who
may have been inspired by a falling apple.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
This scientist names an interference pattern produced when a convex lens is placed on a glass plane,
called his "rings". Viscosity is constant for different shear rates in his namesake fluids. One law
named for him states that the time (*) derivative of momentum equals the net force, more often written F
equals ma. Independently of Leibniz, he invented calculus. For 10 points, name this English physicist who
names three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
The diffraction pattern produced by a convex lens lying on a flat surface is known as this man's
"rings". He formulated a law which states that the rate of heat transfer is proportional to the
difference in temperatures. This physicist built the first practical reflecting telescope and developed a
theory of color based on the observation that a (*) prism decomposes white light into the visible
spectrum. He discussed "The System of the World" and proved Kepler's Laws in his Principia
Mathematica. For 10 points, name this English scientist who stated that F equals ma in his second law of
motion.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
This man modified the binomial theorem to allow for all real exponents. This man heavily studied
diffraction of light in his treatise on color, Opticks. This man is better known for devising a method which
he termed "the method of fluxions," but admitted that that work was done "on the shoulders of giants." This
man's Principia discusses his work on the laws of gravitation, which he developed calculus to explain. For
the point, name this English scientist who devised three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
One law derived by this scientist states that the time derivative of temperature is equal to the
negative of a constant k times the temperature difference between an object, or substance, and the
ambient temperature; that is his law of cooling. A constant used in another law due to this scientist is
equal to (*) 6.67 times ten to the minus eleven and is symbolized big G. Both this scientist and Gottfried
Leibniz are credited with discovering calculus. For 10 points, identify this discoverer of a universal law of
gravitation.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
Mordehai Milgrom modified this man's theories in an attempt to explain the galaxy rotation problem
without using dark matter. A law named after this man states that a body's rate of heat loss is proportional
to the temperature difference between the body and the environment. He demonstrated that white light is
made up of the full spectrum of colors in his treatise Opticks. He gives his name to a kilogram-meter per
second squared, the SI unit of force, and he stated that "F equals m a." For 10 points, name this British
physicist who names three laws of motion and may have been hit by a falling apple.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
This man greatly improved the invention of Niccolo Zucchi (ZOOK-kee), and in correspondence with John
Flamsteed he dismissed the notion that comets have polarity. The flattening of the Earth at the poles was
first suggested by this man, whose De motu corporum in gyrum (JIGH-rum) contained a new derivation of
Kepler's third law. This man famously settled a celestial mechanics dispute between Robert Hooke and
Edmond Halley by offering a proof of the inverse square law. Significantly advancing astronomy with his
1668 reflecting telescope, name this man who successfully explained the elliptical orbits of planets with his
theory of universal gravitation in his book Philosophiae (fee-loh-soh-FEE-ay) Naturalis Principia (prin-SIpee-uh) Mathematica.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
This scientist names a type of reflecting telescope with a concave primary mirror and flat diagonal
secondary mirror and was the first fully functional one. One law named for this man has a proportionality
constant that was measured with a torsion balance by Cavendish. That law governs a solely attractive
inverse-square force. Another of his results states that force is equal to mass times acceleration. For 10
points, name this man who outlined three laws of motion in his Principia Mathematica.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
A quantum analog of one formula named for this man is named for Ehrenfest (AIR-en-fest).
Interference patterns due to an air film between a lens and a glass are called this man's "rings." Another law
named for this man is also called the law of inertia, while a third law is often summarized as saying that for
every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. For 10 points, name this British physicist whose three
laws of motion include the equation F equals m a.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
Roger Cotes wrote the preface to this scientist's most famous piece of writing. He expounded upon the
nature of colored light in his Opticks. This man related the heat loss for a body to the difference in the
temperatures of the body and the surroundings in his Law of Cooling, and he created an inverse square law
for universal gravitation. This man, who is the namesake of the SI unit for force. For 10 points, identify this
British physicist who was allegedly inspired by a falling apple.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
This scientist demonstrated that light was composed of seven spectral hues in his seminal work Opticks.
One law named for this scientist states that the rate of temperature change for a body is proportional the
temperature difference between a body and its surroundings. Another of his laws can be expressed as "force
equals mass times acceleration." For 10 points, name this physicist who wrote the Principia Mathematica
and formulated three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
This man got William Chaloner arrested for counterfeiting while he served as Master of the Royal Mint.
Samuel Clarke supported this man, who succeeded Isaac Barrow as the second Lucasian Chair. He wrote
the manuscript De motu to William Halley. This man introduced a dot over a variable to represent its
derivative. Alexander Pope wrote, "God said 'Let [this man] be, and all was light." In a letter to Robert
Hooke, this man mentioned that he had "seen further" by "standing on the shoulders of giants." He used a
prism to separate a beam of light, as detailed in his tract Opticks. For 10 points, name this man who
theorized universal gravitation, though an apple had nothing to do with it.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
An interference pattern of concentric rings is known for this man. He demonstrated that white light was
composed of the visible spectrum in his work, Opticks. He expanded ideas from "On The Motion of
Bodies"into a larger work that discussed air resistance, the speed of sound, and tidal forces in addition to
defining centripetal motion. That work, published in 1686, was Principia Mathematica, where he also
stated that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. For 10 points, name this English scientist who
names three laws of motion.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
Its constant of proportionality is proportional to the Nusselt number, and it may be simplified further when
the Biot number is less than zero point one. It is replaced by Fourier's law when only a solid or a system of
solids is being considered, since this law considers fluid pressure and velocity in addition to thermal
conductivity. Adaptable to free flow by raising the right hand side to five fourths or four thirds, FTP,
identify this differential equation that suggests in processes like forced convection, the rate of temperature
change for a body is proportional to the temperature difference between it and its environment.
ANSWER: Newton's law of cooling
One of these laws implies the conservation of linear momentum. The first of these laws is simply a
specific case of the second in which the net external force is zero. When these laws are combined with
the universal law of gravitation, they explain the three laws of planetary (*) motion. Another of these
laws states that force is equal to mass times acceleration. For 10 points, identify these laws, the third of
which states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction.
ANSWER: Newton's laws of motion
One analogue of this law relates the expectation value of an operator to its commutator with the
Hamiltonian; that analogue, Ehrenfest's theorem, reduces to this equation in the limit of large quantum
numbers. A term accounting for the loss of exhaust is added to one side of this equation to obtain the ideal
rocket equation. The impulse-momentum theorem follows from this law, whose rotational analogue states
that torque equals moment of inertia times alpha. Its original form stated that net force equals the time
derivative of momentum. For 10 points, name this law of physics which states that force equals mass times
acceleration.
ANSWER: Newton's Second Law of Motion [prompt on F = ma]
A generalization of this law to quantum mechanical operators is known as the Ehrenfest Theorem,
while in non-inertial reference frames it holds only for effective force unless one adds terms to the
right side for centrifugal, coriolis, and (*) azimuthal forces. When mass is not constant, this law is often
given as "impulse equals the integral of force with respect to time," or that F equals dp dt. For 10
points, identify this law of classical mechanics which states that force equals mass times acceleration.
ANSWER: Newton's Second Law [prompt on Newton's Law]
Special relativity requires this law to be modified since momentum is approximated. Applying it in
the radial direction to uniform circular motion gives the centripetal force. Impulse is derived from
this law by integrating with respect to time. This law actually equates (*) force with the time-derivative
of momentum, but for constant mass is expressed in a more familiar form. For 10 points, name this law
often written as F equals m a.
ANSWER: Newton's second law of motion (prompt on Newton's law[s] or on law[s] of motion)
The quantum mechanical analogue of this formula is known as the Ehrenfest ("AIR"-en-fest)
theorem, and the position equation for a harmonic oscillator is derived by equating this formula with
Hooke's Law. One statement of this law equates impulse with mass times the change in velocity, and
that statement can also be used to determine an object's change in (*) momentum. This formula shows
how a person's weight changes on planets with different gravitational acceleration. FTP, name this law
introduced by a British physicist that is commonly stated as F equals m a.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton's Second Law of Motion [prompt on Newton's Laws; prompt on F equals m a before mentioned]
Applying Ehrenfest's theorem to the momentum operator recovers this equation in quantum mechanics. It
can be used to derive a law setting the change in velocity proportional to the logarithm of initial mass over
final mass. That equation, the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation, requires a generalized version of this equation
since mass is not constant. Integrating this law with respect to time gives the impulse, because the time
derivative of momentum appears on one side of it. One often draws a free body diagram before applying
this law, which requires vector sums of forces. For 10 points, name this law of mechanics which states that
net force equals mass times acceleration.
ANSWER: Newton's second law of motion [prompt on F = ma]
A generalization of this statement to quantum mechanical operators is known as the Ehrenfest theorem. The
motion of simple harmonic oscillators can be described by setting Hooke's law equal to one form of this
statement, and when mass is not constant, one side of it is rewritten as the time derivative of momentum.
Free body diagrams are often used in conjunction with this statement, and weight is found by replacing one
term in this law with a constant approximately equal to 9.8 meters per second squared. For 10 points, name
this law of motion which states that force is equal to mass times acceleration.
ANSWER: Newton's Second Law of Motion [prompt on partial answer]
In special relativity, this equation is modified by multiplying by gamma or gamma cubed, depending
on whether two vectors are perpendicular or parallel. Adding a term including the change in mass
with respect to time, or the thrust, to this law produces the rocket equation. A (*) free body diagram
can be used to examine all the components involved in this law. The rotational analogue of this law equates
the torque to the product of the moment of inertia and the angular acceleration. Its original form equates the
time derivative of momentum to force, but one side is most often given in terms of acceleration. For 10
points, name this law of motion which states F equals m times a.
ANSWER: Newton's Second Law (prompt on "Newton's laws" of motion)
This statement is apparently violated in classical electrodynamics by magnetic forces between moving
charges that do not occur along a common line. Because of this statement, internal forces cancel each other,
and thus for a system with no external forces momentum is conserved. This statement explains why the ratio
of acceleration of two objects in a collision is inversely proportional to the ratio of their masses. For 10
points, identify this law which states that two interacting particles exert forces on each other equal in
magnitude and opposite in direction, commonly stated as "every action has an equal and opposite reaction."
ANSWER: Newton's third law of motion
Noether's Theorem dealing with Lagrangian mechanics can be seen as an expansion of this principle. This
statement generalized forces as interactions which cannot have only one direction. It can be explained by
the Law of Conservation of Momentum, a broader statement of this principle, which was derived from it by
its namesake. FTP, name this law of motion that states for every force exerted by A on B, B exerts a force
of equal magnitude and opposite direction on A.
ANSWER: Newton's Third Law of Motion
This result occurs because Price's theorem states that all nonspherical protrusions must be radiated
away as gravitational waves. Because of this result, which was proven by Israel and Carter, the
objects governed by it have only (*) four types, one of which is co-named for Ted Newman. It leads to the
information paradox that causes Planck's law to be obeyed exactly by Hawking radiation. For 10 points,
name this theorem that states that mass, electric charge, and angular momentum are the only parameters
needed to completely characterize all solutions to the Einstein-Maxwell equations for black holes.
ANSWER: the no-hair theorem [accept stuff like "black holes have no hair," etc.]
This term is applied to the points where an orbital path crosses a plane such as the ecliptic. This term
also describes the lines on Chladni plates. The angular momentum quantum number determines how
many planar, or angular, types of these things that an electron orbital has, and some electron orbitals
also have radial types of these. In a ripple tank, these are the points where destructive interference
is maximized. These do not exist at the end of an open-ended air column, but one of these is at a
closed end. Name this location on a standing wave where there is minimal motion.
ANSWER: nodes
This theorem does not apply to topological currents that result from solitons. Charge named for the
namesake of this theorem is used to calculate the entropy of a stationary black hole. A related theorem
proved by the same person applies for an action that is an invariant of an infinite Lie group. Its quantum
equivalent is the Ward-Takahashi identity. This theorem, presented in 1918 by Felix Klein rather than its
namesake, was demonstrated after David Hilbert invited a mathematician to work in Gottingen. For 10
points, what theorem named for a German scientist states that differentiable symmetry in a system described
the Lagrangian has a corresponding conservation law?
ANSWER: Noether's theorem
For a cascade, the Friis equation can be used to calculate a ratio involving this phenomenon's associated
"figure" or "temperature." One common measurement of it is made by the A-weighting curves. The "shot"
type of this phenomenon occurs at p-n junctions in bipolar junction transistors. The voltage associated with
another type equals the square root of quantity four times Boltzmann's constant times temperature times
resistance times bandwidth by Nyquist's formula; that type is referred to as the "Johnson" or "thermal" type.
In proportionally wide bands, the power of its "pink" type is the same. A signal's clarity is often expressed
as a ratio of the power of the signal that of this phenomenon. A flat power spectrum density is characteristic
of the "white" type of, for 10 points, what random fluctuations in a signal?
ANSWER: noise
A type of this phenomenon named after Johnson is frequency bandwidth dependent and occurs due
to charge inhomogeneities created by thermal agitation of charge carriers. Its shot variety occurs
when electrons cross junctions and its (*) flicker variety is ubiquitous and significant at low frequencies.
Its frequency-independent form is referred to as white and it can be minimized by low-pass filters and
modulation. For 10 points, name this extraneous information that decreases the accuracy and precision of a
signal.
ANSWER: noise
In a CCD, correlated double sampling can be used to reduce the presence of this phenomenon. In
capacitors, a type of this phenomenon with mean square voltage equal to Boltzmann's constant times
temperature over capacitance is caused by thermal excitation of electrons and is known as its JohnsonNyquist variety. The shot variety of this phenomenon results from slightly different arrival times of discrete
inputs to a system. A lock-in amplifier can be used to maximize the ratio of signal to this phenomenon,
which is called "white" when its power spectrum is constant. For 10 points, give this term for unwanted
disturbances in signals due to random fluctuations.
ANSWER: noise [accept Johnson-Nyquist noise; or shot noise; or white noise]
When an object hits a surface, this force provides for the deceleration of the object. For an object resting at
an angle, this quantity can be calculated by multiplying the mass times the acceleration due to gravity times
the cosine of the angle at which the object is resting. One of the basic quantities in mechanics, this force can
be calculated for any object lying perpendicular to ground by mass times the acceleration due to gravity.
For 10 points, name this force, the force which is required to hold an object in place which always occurs
perpendicular to the object.
ANSWER: normal force [prompt on "weight", prompt on Fn or "F sub n"]
One can use this quantity multiplied by the coefficient of friction mu to determine the friction operating
on a body, and this quantity is equal to mass times gravity times cosine of the incline of a surface for a solid
body. For 10 points, name this quantity which represents the perpendicular component of the contact force
exerted by a body on a surface, often symbolized by a capital N.
ANSWER: Normal Force [prompt on N]
The existence of the helium type of this phenomenon was confirmed in 2000 with the discovery of V445
Puppis, and these are normally classified by their light curve development speeds. Usually occurring in
close binary systems, the dwarf type of this results when the accretion (uh-KREE-shun) disk reaches critical
temperature, causing a change in viscosity. Unlike their more luminous counterparts, these events never
lead to the formation of neutron stars. These events are triggered by the movement of hydrogen from a red
giant to the surface of its companion white dwarf. Name these stellar explosions that eject much less matter
than their "super" cousins.
ANSWER: novas or novae [do not accept "supernova"]
When cobalt is added to this device, it can be described as "salted." Stanislaw Ulam developed a
hypothetical method to propel spaceships using this kind of device, one type of which he helped
develop along with Hungarian scientist Edward Teller. By removing the tamper, this device can be
modified to emit large amounts of neutrons, which can harm nearby lifeforms but leave buildings
standing, and famous devices of this type include Trinity, Little Boy, and Fat Man. For 10 points, name
this device built by the Manhattan Project.
ANSWER: nuclear bomb [accept nuclear weapon; accept nuke; accept atomic bomb; accept a-bomb]
A new class of these are known as pebble bed ones. The majority of these use a pressurized water
design and an emergency shutdown of one is called a SCRAM. The United States no longer permits
breeder ones. An important part of these are control rods and often they will have hyperbolic cooling
towers. The waste from one of these is radioactive as is the fuel. For 10 points, what type of reactor uses
the heat generated by a controlled chain reaction involving elements like uranium or plutonium to provide
electrical or mechanical power.
ANSWER: nuclear fission reactor [or nuclear fission power plant]
Graphing the rate of power increase in these devices over time shows a discontinuity called the
"prompt jump". Assuming one of these devices is non-infinite requires adding two non-leakage
probability values to the four-factor formula, creating the six-factor formula. Point kinetics
equations are used to describe these devices when they have a nonzero excess multiplication factor.
These devices can undergo a positive feedback loop when their void coefficient becomes very positive,
and buildup of (*) xenon in these device can lead to a "poison outage". Experimental versions of these
devices use molten salt as a coolant, and those that can generate more material than they consume are called
"breeders". Either heavy water or graphite rods can be used as moderators to control the neutron flux in
these devices, and they typically use enriched uranium fuel. For 10 points, name these devices which use
fission to produce energy.
ANSWER: nuclear reactor [or fission reactor after "fission" is read]
Operation in these devices is governed by the multi-group equations, which give the scalar flux; the power
density in one is given by the average binding energy release times the scalar flux times the cross-section
for their namesake process. Some of these have hard, fast spectra and use liquid metal coolant, but more
conventional moderation is with graphite or water. For 10 points, name these devices including PWR's,
BWR's and breeders that split atoms of uranium, plutonium or thorium via fission to make electricity.
ANSWER: nuclear fission reactors or fission reactors [grudgingly accept nuclear power plants]
These structures can be described by their surface, volume, and asymmetry energies in the
Bethe-Weizsacker (BEET-uh VAYT-zahk-ehr) formula. Maria Goeppert-Mayer explained the "magic
number" phenomenon of these structures. They are held together by the exchange of virtual mesons, the
carriers of the residual strong force. Two of these structures in hydrogen are fused to form a helium one in
the sun. For 10 points, identify these atomic structures composed of neutrons and protons.
ANSWER: atomic nucleus
The "halo" variety of these objects is found near drip lines. An equation modeling these objects includes
pairing, asymmetry, and surface terms and is based on Gamow's liquid drop model. That equation fails to
predict the increase in stability in these objects at certain "magic numbers" such as 2 and 8. Their existence
was discovered in an experiment in which alpha particles were deflected by a sheet of gold, and J. J.
Thomson's plum pudding model of the atom lacked this structure. For 10 points, name this center of an
atom which contains protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: Nucleus [accept Nuclei]
The stable radius of one of these structures is equal to 1.25 times their mass to the one-third
power. One theory of the structure of these objects describes how those with 2, 8, and 20 substituents
are unusually stable; that model is the shell model. Hyperfine splitting is caused by the magnetic
moment of these entities. Deformed and unusually long-lived ones might be found in the Island of (*)
Stability, and stable ones are said to have a magic number of constituents. Their binding energy can be
calculated by finding the equivalent energy of their mass defects, and they are made of baryons held
together by the strong force. For 10 points, identify these structure which contains protons and neutrons and
is surrounded by electrons, the center of an atom.
ANSWER: atomic nucleus [prompt on "atoms"]
One model for the energy of these objects contains a volume term whose energy arises from the energy of a
pion-mediated interaction in these objects; that model treats these objects as incompressible liquid drops.
They are found to be particularly stable when they are composed of magic numbers of particles. Its
constituents are the two most stable baryons, composed of up and down quarks. The disproof of the plum
pudding model by Rutherford's gold foil experiment led to the conclusion that these structures exist. For 10
points, name this structure, which may undergo beta decay and is composed of protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: atomic nucleus [or atomic nuclei; accept nuclides]
The Born-Oppenheimer approximation, which allows approximate decomposition of atomic wavefunctions,
depends on the relative "slow" motion of these entities. The subclass of mesons known as pions mediates
the attractive forces within it, which is sometimes known as the residual strong force. This entity's
discovery disproved J.J. Thomson's Plum Pudding model and came about by the unexpected scattering of
decaying radium by gold foil in the Rutherford Experiment. For 10 points, name this region of the atom
which can split or merge in its fission or fusion, also known as an alpha particle in the context of helium that
consists of protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: atomic nucleus
One formula for calculating the mass of this structure includes volume, surface, Coulomb, asymmetry, and
pairing terms. That formula, which was developed by Weizsacker, was based on this structure's resemblance
to a drop of liquid. This structure is especially stable if it contains a magic number of constituents, which
are held together by the strong force. Four baryons are emitted from this structure during alpha decay, and it
was discovered in the gold foil experiment. For 10 points, name this atomic structure composed of protons
and neutrons.
ANSWER: atomic nucleus [prompt on "atom"]
The lifetime of these objects can be measured using the charge plunger method. One equation describing
the effect of collisions on the energies of these objects has a term of minus 2 over m times the square root of
the product of masses and energies times cosine theta. Their interaction with other objects can be of a
pickup or stripping nature. One formula for the energy stored by these has a term that is proportional one
over the cube root of mass times z squared. A partially empirical formula for the properties of these has
surface, volume, asymmetry, and Coulomb terms. Stability in these structures occurs at certain magic
numbers. The Weizsacker formula for these objects is based on the liquid drop model. Their structure is
described by the shell model. These small objects combine in the CNO cycle. For 10 points, name these
objects made out of protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: atomic nuclei [or atomic nucleus; prompt on atom]
A combination of two earlier models of this thing that incorporates vibration and rotation is the
so-called collective model. A correction term in a formula for these things adds or subtracts a term
equal to 11.18 MeV over A to the one-half for even-even and odd-odd types of them, respectively.
That formula, developed by Carl Friedrich von Weizsaecker, incorporates empirical data and
assumes that this thing behaves as an incompressible liquid drop, and is used to calculate the binding
energy of these things, which is the energy needed to (*) split them into multiple parts. These things are
more stable when their constituents are present in so-called "magic numbers". Its existence was confirmed
by the results of the gold foil experiment. For 10 points, what part of the atom consists of protons and
neutrons?
ANSWER: atomic nuclei [or atomic nucleus; prompt on atoms]
One formula approximating the mass of these objects contains an asymmetry term and is named
after Bethe and Weizsacker. George Gamow proposed the liquid drop model to explain the shape of
these objects. The composition of these structures relate to "magic numbers" as predicted by the shell
model, though deformations must be accounted for in their (*) "island of stability." These entities were
notably missing from the J.J. Thomson's "plum pudding" model and were shown to exist in an experiment
in which Rutherford fired alpha particles at a piece of gold foil. For ten points, identify these structures
consisting of protons and neutrons that are located at the center of an atom.
ANSWER: atomic nucleus (or nuclei, do not accept or prompt on "atom")
The semi-empirical Weizsacker formula for this thing's mass improves on the earlier liquid drop
model of it. This thing is most stable when it has a "magic number" of constituents. An experiment
disproving the plum pudding model necessitated this thing's existence, and involved firing alpha
particles at a sheet of (*) gold foil. This thing is held together by the strong force, which prevents all the
positive particles from flying apart. For 10 points, identify this thing home to protons and neutrons, located
at the center of an atom.
ANSWER: atomic nucleus
George Gamow analogized this structure to an incompressible fluid in the liquid drop model. The
experiment that discovered this structure was conducted by Ernest Marsden and Hans Geiger and overseen
by Ernest Rutherford. This structure was discovered in the "gold foil" experiment. For 10 points, name this
dense structure composed of protons and neutrons at the center of an atom.
ANSWER: the atomic nucleus
Sudarshan and Mishra hypothesized that performing this frequently will cause the "freezing" of the
evolution of a system via the quantum zeno effect. Doing this splits the universe into the number of possible
outcomes for this process according to the many worlds theory. According to the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle, this process cannot be simultaneously performed with arbitrary precision for commuting
variables. For 10 points, identify this process which would cause the collapse of a system into a particular
energy eigenstate, as exemplified by opening the box with Schrodinger's cat in it.
ANSWER: observation [or measuring; accept word forms]
This equation superseded an incorrect one known as Barlow's law, which falsely implied that longdistance telegraphy was impossible, while its magnetic equivalent is called Hopkinson's law. This
law's continuum form relates the electric field to the current density vector. (*) Nonlinear components
such as LEDs and other semiconductors do not obey this law, while the quantity defined by this law is
inversely proportional to cross-sectional area, proportional to length, and adds in series. This law states that
the voltage is equal to the current times resistance. For 10 points, identify this law that shares its name with
the SI unit of resistance.
ANSWER: Ohm's Law
This law is the basis of the Hodgkin-Huxley model, and its namesake also noted that the ear perceives
sound as the sum of harmonic tones. One generalization of this law relates the magnetic flux and reluctance
and is named for Hopkinson, and this law fails to take Johnson-Nyquist noise into account due to its
quantum nature. One method of deriving this law relies on taking the integral of E dot d l, which gives this
law's vector form as J equals sigma times E. This law can be derived using the hydraulic analogy, and it is
usually used in concert with Kirchoff's rules. FTP, name this law that states that voltage equals current
times resistance, or V equals I R, named for a German physicist.
ANSWER: Ohm's Law
A counterpart to it involves reluctance and is known as Hopkinson's Law. It can be applied to hydraulics in
describing the relationship between pressure and flow rate. The continuum form of this law can be
combined with the integral of the electric field and the cross-section area to get another form. Another
version of this law expresses two of the values in root mean square form and switches another of the terms
for impedance. Modified versions of this law include one that has a term for self-inductance and another
that can be used to calculate the electromotive force. FTP, name this law that states that voltage is equal to
the product of current and resistance.
ANSWER: Ohm's Law
This principle can be derived under the Drude model by incorporating drift velocity, and it is analogous to
Poiseuille's law of hydraulics. The apparatus originally used to determine this principle had to account for
temperature change and wire length. In the magnetic counterpart of this principle, flux is inversely
proportional to reluctance, and Kirchoff's statement of it includes a conductivity parameter. For AC
circuits, the phase angle must be known before this principle can be used to calculate power, and Z replaces
R in the equation that expresses this law. Discovered by the namesake of the SI unit of electrical impedance,
name this law of circuits which says that potential difference across a conductor is equal to current times
resistance.
ANSWER: Ohm's law
In tokamaks, a phenomenon named for this statement has a lower power density at high
temperatures and will thus be used in complement with neutral beam injection and cyclotron
resonance to perform heating in ITER. One version of this statement contains a term proportional to
the cross product of the current density with the magnetic field. That term is known as the Hall
current. Another version of this equation states that the (*) current density is equal to the product of the
conductivity and the electric field. Combining this statement with another equation for the power yields
Joule's Law. For AC circuits, one quantity in this statement is replaced with the impedance. For 10 points,
name this law which states that the voltage is equal to the product of current and resistance.
ANSWER: Ohm's Law [accept "generalized Ohm's law"]
This law cannot be applied to diodes since the relationship between its variables is nonlinear. The
analogous quantity impedance is substituted into this law for AC components. An equivalent statement of
this law is J equals sigma times E, or current density is equal to conductivity times electric field. This law is
often used in conjunction with Kirchoff's (KEER-choff's) rules to find the potential drop across a resistive
element. For 10 points, name this law that states voltage equals current times resistance.
ANSWER: Ohm's law
Located in the Tharsis bulge, it is the largest between it and others in the bulge such as Arsia, Pavonis, and
Ascraeus. Its formation has been dated back to the Amazonian epoch. It consists of a central edifice 17
miles high and 335 miles across that is surrounded by an outward-facing cliff up to about 6 miles high. This
means that anyone who stood on the planet's surface could not see the top because of the curvature of the
planet. Located on the planet Mars, FTP name this universally largest known volcano.
ANSWER: Olympus Mons
The electronic contribution to heat capacity varies with this power of temperature. The Lorentz gamma is
raised to this power in the expression for relativistic momentum in terms of velocity. A substance's
magnetization is proportional to this power of the H-field strength. The electric potential due to an infinite
sheet of charge varies with this power of the distance from the sheet. Electrical resistance varies with this
power of a resistor's length, and the gravitational force on an object is proportional to this power of its
mass. For 10 points, identify this power, which relates two quantities that are linearly proportional.
ANSWER: one [or linear before mention]
This is the fraction of intensity of unpolarized light transferred through an ideal linear polarizer. In a
double-slit experiment, this number is added to the integer n and the quantity is multiplied by lambda to
find the condition for destructive interference. Multiplying this number by the radius of curvature of a
spherical lens gives the focal length. A medium of refractive index 2 would have light travelling through it
at this fraction of c. For 10 points, name this figure, which is also multiplied by m v squared to give kinetic
energy.
ANSWER: 1/2 [or one-half or 0.5 or 50%]
One constant named for this man is equal to one-half of an object's rotational velocity over its
distance from the galactic center plus one-half of the derivative of its velocity with respect to its
radial position. That constant is used to describe the rotational properties of stars in our galaxy. Part
of WISE's mission was to verify John Matese's hypothesis that a gas giant named Tyche existed in
an (*) entity named for this man. The existence of a brown dwarf named Nemesis lying in that object has
largely been disproven. It is thought that long period comets originate from an entity named for this man
that lies outside the scattered disc and Kuiper Belt. For 10 points, what astronomer lends his name to a
"cloud" at the outer edge of the solar system?
ANSWER: Jan Oort
The inner section of this region contains objects with Tisserand parameter less than three that are
dominated by interactions with Jupiter. The original estimate of the size of this system was obtained by
setting its semi-major axis to the average maximum distance of a set of 19 known orbits. A secondary
structure that exchanges matter with this one is named for Hill. A hypothetical object that would traverse
this location with a period of approximately 30 million years is Nemesis. Hypothesized as a reservoir
necessary because icy objects cannot reside long near the sun, this structure is currently thought to begin at
about 50,000 astronomical units. For 10 points, name this structure past that defines the gravitational outer
edge of the solar system, the source of long-period comets.
ANSWER: the Oort cloud
The Nice ["niece"] model traces this object's origins to scattering from Jupiter, while Damocloid
asteroids are believed to have developed from objects originating here. Matese and Whitmere
suppose that the planet Tyche may be located here. Julio Fernandez posits that its chief source may
be the (*) scattered disc, while Richard Muller suggested that Nemesis likely existed within this location.
Its inner region, more disc-shaped, is named for J. G. Hills. For 10 points, name this hypothesized spherical
entity, a possible source of long-period comets vastly more distant than the Kuiper Belt.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort cloud
The origin of this entity was modeled by Safronov and Cameron, and within 10 million years Gliese 710
will collide with it. Its disk-shaped inner portion is called the Hills cloud, and objects like Hale-Bopp are
thought to originate from this region. Lying about one light-year from the sun, it is considered the outer
boundary of the solar system. This region contains trans-Neptunian objects, along with the scattered disc
and Kuiper belt. The hypothesized source of long-period comets, for 10 points, name this region of space
named after its Dutch discoverer.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort cloud
In 1996, an especially bright object from this region was observed by and named after amateur astronomer
Yuji Hyakutake. John Matese and Daniel Whitmire have proposed that a body called Tyche may be found
in this region. A series of extinction events roughly every 26 million years led Richard Muller to speculate
that a dwarf star called Nemesis occasionally travels through this region. A similar object named for Hills
lies in this region, which is sometimes co-named for Ernst Opik and lies outside the Kuiper belt. For 10
points, name this region that stretches nearly a lightyear out from the Sun, and from which long-period
comets are thought to originate.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort cloud
The existence of an object in this region was proposed to explain recurrent cycles of mass-extinction events.
That proposed object is either a brown or red dwarf called Nemesis. Tyche is a planet hypothesized to exist
in this region. The inner portion of this region is the disc-shaped Hills cloud. Halley-type short-period
comets and all long-period comets originate from this region, and the dwarf planet Sedna may have also
originated in this region. Voyager 1 will probably reach this region in about three hundred years. For 10
points, name this outer boundary of our solar system, almost a light year away from the Sun and a thousand
times farther away than the Kuiper Belt.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort cloud
Theories about the formation of this region were proposed by Cameron and Safronov. Part of this
area is named for J. G. Hills, who theorized that it may have inner and outer parts. This area may be
disturbed by gravity from Nemesis, which is a hypothesized brown dwarf in a binary relationship with
the sun. This area may have been the original home of Sedna, and it was first proposed by the Estonian
scientist Ernst Opik. For 10 points, name this region at the edge of the solar system, the hypothesized
source of long-period comets.
ANSWER: Oort Cloud [or Opik-Oort Cloud before mentioned]
One model of this object's creation indicates that it is composed of debris and types of ice scattered
into space by the gas giants shortly after the solar system's creation. The hypothesized brown dwarf
Nemesis is said to reside within this region, and a disc-shaped area that regularly exchanges matter
with this object is called the (*) Hills Cloud. It is sometimes named for the Estonian scientist who
hypothesized it; that man was Ernst Opik. It is usually named for the Dutchman who proposed it, and it is
the origin for many long-period comets, such as Hale-Bopp. For 10 points, name this region that determines
the outer boundary of our solar system.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort Cloud
A theorized inner region to this area is named after Hills. Safranov and Cameron proposed the two most
widely accepted models of its origin, and the object Gliese 710 may cause havoc here sometime within the
next ten million years. 2000 CR105 is one of only two objects identified that may belong to this group.
Richard A. Muller suggested that a brown dwarf that orbits the sun periodically disrupts this area, and it
extends nearly a quarter of the way to Proxima Centauri. For 10 points, name this region of space thought
to contain 90377 Sedna, theorized to be the source of long-range comets and named after a Dutch dude.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort Cloud
This location could be the home for the hypothetical super-Jupiter gas giant "Tyche." The inner
part of this region is named for Hills and most likely contains 90377 Sedna. This location is believed
to be the source of entities named for (*) Hale-Bopp and Halley. For 10 points, name this spherical
location in space thought to be the source of all long-period comets and which is named for a Dutch
astronomer.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort cloud
Damocloids are believed to originate from this body, which is located outside the oligarch halo. Gliese
710 is predicted to move through the outer edges of this body. The depletion problem of this body is
solved by the interaction via galactic tides between the spheroidal outer region and the proposed
dense inner toroidal region. The scattered (*) disc has been proposed as the primary source of objects in
this body. John Matese proposed the existence of a gas giant in this body nicknamed Tyche, while another
hypothetical object in this body thought to cause periodic mass extinctions is called Nemesis. 2008 KV2
and 90377 Sedna are possible candidates of its inner region. Archetypal objects like McNaught, Hale-Bopp,
and Halley are thought to originate here. For 10 points, name this region of the solar system thought to be
the origin of long-period comets.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort cloud
One observable phenomenon in this region can be caused by galactic disk tides or a close proximity with
passing foreign stars, and the objects contained in this region were expelled from the protoplanetary disk by
gravitational forces of the gas giants. Bodies in this region are replenished by an inner region named for
Hills, and this region was first theorized based on the gravitational perturbation of objects originating from
it. Containing Sedna and believed to be the source of long-period comets, For 10 points, name this
spherical region encompassing the Sun named for its Dutch discoverer.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort Cloud
The Safronov and Cameron hypotheses regard this region's formation, and it was first theorized by
Estonian scientist Ernst Opik. Its inner section is sometimes named for Hills, and the Nemesis theory
regards a [*] brown dwarf in it. Thought to be remains of the original proto-planetary disk, this region is
the origin of objects like Hale-Bopp, long-period comets. For 10 points, name this hypothetical region that
extends to the gravitational edge of our solar system, just outside the Kuiper [KY-purr] belt.
ANSWER: Opik-Oort cloud
The Damaocloids are believed to originate from this region, and Bierman suggested that molecular
clouds- disruption of it was critical to its formation. 2008 KV42 is believed to originate from here,
and it was hypothesized to exist due to bodies perturbed by planets becoming decoupled from
planetary regions by perturbations from stars. Its discoverer also names a pair of constants that
relate the sun's distance and motion from the galactic center, and its inner region is named for Hills. Longperiod comets originate from this region, which has been hypothesized to be perturbed by Gliese 710, or
Nemesis. For 10 points, name this sperical region of comets, rocks, and dust about one light-year from the
sun.
ANSWER: Oort cloud
The first one to be widely available was the Fairchild UA-709, though that was replaced by the much more
popular 741. Putting one of these devices in parallel with a resistor to create a hysteresis loop creates a
Schmidt Trigger. A common one of these devices uses three Widlar mirrors and a Darlington transistor
configuration in its class A gain stage. Commonly used in simpler configurations as comparators and
integrators, ideal versions of these devices have an infinite slew rate and zero input current and infinite
open-loop gain. Consisting of an inverting and non-inverting input, for 10 points, name these devices that
use feedback to take a series of voltage inputs to create a higher-amplitude output voltage.
ANSWER: Operational amplifier or Op-amp
A rolloff of minus 20 dB per decade is typical of the internally compensated type of this device. An
important measure used to characterize this device is how fast its output can change, which is the slew rate.
One of these devices is used in the circuit for a weighted summer, as well as for an R-2R ladder DAC. The
most commonly used one of these is the 741. 20 times the log of the quotient of the differential and
common-mode gains of this device gives its CMRR or common-mode rejection ratio. Their plus terminal is
connected to ground and V sub in to form an inverting and noninverting one, respectively. The ideal version
of this device has infinite input impedance and open-loop gain. For 10 points, identify these circuit elements
whose output voltage is a multiplied version of the difference in its two inputs.
ANSWER: op amp [or operational amplifier; prompt on amplifier]
In computer science this is word is applied to data types whose name is listed in the interface section of a
module but whose actual type is defined in the implementation section of the module, and is often used
pejoratively for a binary large object, or BLOB. In astrophysics, the average amount of capacity for gases to
be defined as this are calculated by measures named after Max Planck or Svein Rosseland, depending on
their weighting function, whereas a similar result produced by dust is generally referred to as extinct. In
everyday parlance, a material is referred to as this due to some combination of absorption, reflection, or
refraction. For 10 points give this term, typically applied to something through which light cannot be seen.
ANSWER: opaque
One commonly used method for determining the age of these bodies relies on measuring the
abundance of lithium and beryllium within them. By comparing photographic plates of one of these
bodies taken at different times, Adriaan van Maanen was able to measure proper motion within that
body. These bodies are classified under a scheme developed by Robert Trumpler. One alternate name
for these bodies is due to the fact that they are often located in or near (*) galactic planes. These bodies
are not found in elliptical galaxies, since there is very little star formation there. Examples of these objects
include the Praesepe, the Hyades, and the Pleiades. For 10 points, name these low-density groups of
relatively young stars.
ANSWER: open clusters [or galactic clusters; prompt on star clusters; prompt on clusters]
He calculated the collapse of a pressure-free homogeneous fluid sphere with Hartland Snyder, which led
him to predict the existence of black holes. The effect in which two deuterons orientate so that constituent
neutrons approach is named for Melba Phillips and him. Together with his advisor, he names an
approximation that breaks the wave function into nuclear and electronic components. He is also the
namesake of the maximum mass of a neutron star, along with Tolman and Volkoff. For 10 points, name this
student of Max Born, a nuclear physicist who directed the Los Alamos laboratory during the development
of atomic bomb.
ANSWER: J. Robert Oppenheimer
His first doctoral student, Melba Phillips, was fired from Brooklyn College for refusing to testify in
front of a Senate committee about internal security; with her, he names a type of strip reaction. Using past
research by Richard Tolman he and George Volkoff calculated the upper mass limit of a neutron star; with
his advisor Max Born he approximated the wave function of a molecule. He referenced the Bhagavad Gita's
quote of "now, I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds" after he oversaw the successful Trinity test.
For 10 points, name this physicist, referred to as the "father of the atomic bomb" for his work in the
Manhattan project.
ANSWER: Julius Robert Oppenheimer
With a German, this scientist names a method that splits the wavefunction into electronic and nuclear
components. This scientist cited lines from the Bhagavad Gita, "I am become death, the destroyer of
worlds," in reference to the successful Trinity test. For 10 points, name this American physicist who
worked on the Manhattan Project and is known as the "father of the atomic bomb."
ANSWER: Julius Robert Oppenheimer
Attenuation in these objects can be measured using either the cut-back method or a technique known as
OTDR, in which sudden spectral peaks indicate a splice loss. The performance of these devices is
theoretically limited by the Rayleigh scattering limit, which is why exotic materials like fluoride are being
developed for their manufacture. Depending on whether a discontinuity in the index of refraction is present
between the core and the cladding, these devices are classified as step-index or gradient-index types. Like
waveguides in general, variants of these devices which allow for more than one bound solution for each
polarization are known as the multimode type. For 10 points, identify these optical waveguides which allow
light to propagate through a core, frequently made of glass, by means of total internal reflection.
ANSWER: optical fiber or glass fiber or fiber optics
One section of this work posited that planets and comets move through ether that has a resistance six
hundred thousand times less than water. The fourth edition of this book ended with a series of 31 questions
called "Queries", which included hypotheses about chemical affinity and the origin of the universe. This
book's author published it after the death of Robert Hooke, who disagreed with its corpuscular theory. This
book also showed that color is related to angle of refraction. For ten points, name this treatise about light by
Isaac Newton.
ANSWER: Opticks
The radius associated with one important one is calculated by taking the cube root of the quantity
86160 seconds squared times the mass of the earth times big G divided by four pi squared.
Communication platforms that require a constant fixed service are often put into (*) geostationary
and geosynchronous ones. The planets have elliptical ones around the sun. For 10 points, name these
trajectories that allow an object to keep moving around a celestial object because of gravitational attraction,
exemplified by the motions of the moon and satellites.
ANSWER: orbits
The time that it takes to transfer between two of these systems is equal to the square root of the cube of rone plus r-two over eight times the speed of one body. That is how long a Hohmann transfer takes. One of
these around an unstable Lagrange point is known as the halo type. The square of their period is
proportional to the cube of their semi-major axis. The aphelion and perihelion lie along these paths, which
are elliptical according to the first of Kepler's three laws for these systems. For 10 points, what are these
paths taken by the planets around a star?
ANSWER: planetary orbits [or orbital motion; or orbiting systems; accept equivalents; prompt on "planetary motion" or equivalents; prompt on "elliptical motion," "ellipse," or equivalents until "elliptical"]
An annual meteor shower in late October originates in this constellation, home to M42. Its Kappa star,
Saiph, emits mostly ultraviolet light, and its alpha star lies at one vertex of the Winter Triangle. One
asterism in this constellation is composed of Mintaka, Alnilam, and Alnitak, and points towards Aldebaran
and Sirius. The Horsehead Nebula lies in this constellation, found between Taurus and Canis Major. Home
to the stars Bellatrix, Rigel, and Betelgeuse, this constellation features a namesake three-star "belt." For 10
points, name this constellation named after a mythical Greek hunter.
ANSWER: Orion
Gemini's neutron star Geminga is theorized to be a supernova remnant from a partner of Meissa, a star in
this constellation which contains the Becklin-Neugebauer Object. Barnard's loop and the Trapezium Cluster
are located in this constellation, as is the Flame Nebula. Bellatrix is this constellation's gamma star, and its
brightest star is unusually designated "beta"; that star is Rigel and it outshines Betelgeuse. This
constellation contains the Horsehead Nebula, and its most prominent feature is formed by Alnitak, Alnilam,
and Mintaka. For 10 points, name this constellation that contains a namesake belt and represents a
mythological hunter.
ANSWER: Orion
Stars within this constellation include Saiph and the Trapezium Cluster. Barnard's Loop is a
nebula within this constellation, whose other nebulae include the (*) Horsehead Nebula and Messier
Object 42, with which this constellation shares its name. Its most prominent feature consists of the stars
Alnitak, Alnilam, and Mintaka, and other stars in this constellation include Bellatrix, Rigel and Betelgeuse.
For 10 points, name this constellation often referred to as "the hunter" and known for its belt.
ANSWER: Orion
Andrew Ainslie Common's photographs of this region of the galaxy showed that film could record
astronomical features unseen by the eye. Its is a part of the same system as the Kleinmann-Low Nebula.
The Fish's Mouth is a dark region of this place. The infrared emitting Becklin-Neugebauer Object is located
behind this nebula. Some of the first HST images of protoplanetary disks came from this nebula. This
nebula is home to the Trapezium cluster. It is item M42 in the Messier Catalog and is one of the closest
locations of recent star formation. For 10 points, name this nebula that in its namesake constellation is
located below the belt.
ANSWER: Great Orion Nebula [accept the Orion Molecular Cloud before M42]
One feature of this constellation is an asterism that guides the stargazer to Alpha Tauri, also known as
Aldeberan. The star Saiph emits much of its light in ultraviolet, and it contains the brightest class O star in
the night sky, Alnitak, which, along with Mintaka and Alnilam, make up the middle of this constellation.
This constellation's namesake nebula is cataloged as M42, and its meteor shower usually occurs in the
month of October. For 10 points, what is this constellation, home to the stars Bellatrix, Rigel, and
Betelguese, as well as its namesake "belt," also known as the hunter.
ANSWER: Orion
This constellation also gives its name to NASA's next generation of manned spacecraft paired with the Ares
launch vehicle. This constellation contains Flame Nebula and Barnard's Loop, which itself contains the
more recognizable Horsehead Nebula and this constellation's namesake nebula. Bellatrix, a blue giant, is
often referred to as the Gamma star of this constellation. The brightest star in this constellation is Rigel
while the second brightest is Betelgeuse. For 10 points, name this constellation, containing a namesake belt
of three stars, named for a hunter in Greek mythology.
ANSWER: Orion
Background emissions from an object in this constellation led Johannes Hartmann to discover the
interstellar medium, and ionized emissions within it are responsible for Barnard's Loop. An active site of
stellar formation within this constellation, the Molecular Cloud Complex, houses the Flame Nebula as well
as the Horsehead Nebula. Mintaka, Alnilam, and the brightest O star, Alnitak, form a distinctive linear
asterism in this constellation. Bellatrix and Rigel are particularly bright stars here, and its star Betelgeuse
forms the shoulder of its namesake hunter. For 10 points, identify this constellation with notable asterisms
like its Shield and Belt.
ANSWER: Orion
Stars in this constellation form lines that can be used to locate Procyon, Sirius, and Aldebaran, and its iota
star is a quadruple system known as Hatsya. It features a nebula that is the nearest area of massive star
formation and is Messier Object 42. Its gamma star is Bellatrix, while the most notable feature of this
constellation is made up of Alnitak, Alnilam, and Mintaka. Containing the stars Rigel and Betelgeuse, for
10 points, name this constellation known as "The Hunter" that has a namesake "belt."
ANSWER: Orion
Nebulae in this constellation include the Flame and Running Man nebulae, while dimmer stars in this
constellation on the celestial equator include Alnilam and Mintaka. Groupings in this constellation
include the asterism Trapezium, and this constellation is also home to nebulae like Barnard's Loop
and the (*) Horsehead Nebula. Stars in this constellation include Saiph and Bellatrix, while another feature
of this constellation comprises three stars in a row. Rigel, not Betelgeuse, is this constellation's brightest
star. For 10 points, name this constellation with a namesake "belt," named for a famous Greek hunter.
ANSWER: Orion
This constellation sits atop Lepus, the rabbit. It contains a young cluster readily identified by four bright
stars, the Trapezium, which is contained in this constellation's namesake nebula. Its gamma star is
colloquially known as the Amazon Star and is named Bellatrix. Perhaps the most recognizable astronomical
asterism is formed by (*) Altinak, Alninam, and Mintaka, which run in a straight line through this
constellation's center. Its beta star, Rigel, frequently outshines its alpha star, which forms the Winter
Triangle with Procyon and Sirius. For ten points, name this constellation, the Hunter, which contains
Betelgeuse and has a namesake belt.
ANSWER: Orion
This constellation's namesake meteor shower appears to originate between this constellation and Gemini.
One star of this constellation is blue-white and forms one of its legs; that is its kappa star, Saiph. This
constellation's gamma star, bright because of its high temperature, is Bellatrix, while its most famous star is
bright because of its enormous size-a blue supergiant combining high temperature and large volume,
Rigel. In addition to containing Saiph and Betelgeuse, this group's three stars Alnilam, Alnitak, and
Mintaka form an asterism known as its "belt". Name this constellation known as the Hunter.
ANSWER: Orion
This was the name of the first vehicle planned for the canceled Constellation program of missions to the
Moon and Mars, and is the name of the first nebula to be photographed. The constellation of this name
contains a red giant 950 times as large as the Sun, as well as the gamma star Bellatrix. The two primary
stars of this constellation have names meaning "the left leg of the giant" and "the giant's shoulder." For 10
points, Rigel and Betelgeuse (BAY-tell-"juice") are found in what constellation with both a "sword" and a
"belt"?
ANSWER: Orion
This constellation's gamma star is the bright eruptive variable Bellatrix. A better-known star in it has been
observed shrinking for the past fifteen years. This constellation contains Barnard's loop, as well as the tight
open cluster Trapezium and a namesake nebula, M42, though its best known deep space object is the
Horsehead Nebula. An asterism in this constellation is formed by the three stars Alnitak, Alnilam, and
Mintaka, this figure's "belt." For 10 points, name this constellation whose brightest star is Rigel but whose
alpha star is Betelgeuse, the Hunter.
ANSWER: Orion
A tickler coil is used with feedback to create an example of these objects named for Armstrong. An
unusual nonconservative one named for van der Pol conserves energy as long as the parameter mu is
greater than zero. The equation describing a general one of these systems states that the second
derivative of x plus omega sub zero squared x equals zero. RLC circuits function as these systems
when the square root of L over C is small. Their behavior can be described by a Q factor when they
are (*) driven or damped. One class of them undergoes acceleration proportional to the displacement and is
described by Hooke's law; that example is a simple mass on a spring. For 10 points, name these physical
systems that periodically moves about an equilibrium point, whose simple harmonic type is exemplified by
the pendulum.
ANSWER: oscillators [prompt on "resonator"; accept more specific answers, like simple harmonic oscillator, harmonic oscillator, nonconservative oscillator, damped oscillator, driven oscillator, etc]
This element's forbidden spectral lines include 496 and 501 nanometers. Isotope ratios of this element
distinguish K and R meterorites and identical isotope ratios of it are important evidence for the Giant
Impact Hypothesis. Studies by the HST have shown that the trace atmosphere of Ganymede is composed of
compounds of this element. A defining characteristic of carbon stars is that they have more carbon than this
element. The burning process of this in stars creates silicon. The Bethe-Weizsacker-cycle uses this element
as a catalyst along with nitrogen and carbon. For 10 points, name this element whose diatom form is the
second most abundant gas in Earth's atmosphere.
ANSWER: oxygen
Barker's equation is used to describe one phenomenon that occurs in this shape, and a rotating
fluid in a container takes on this shape. In quantum mechanics, a potential of this shape gives rise to
wavefunctions that are the product of a Gaussian function and a Hermite polynomial. In celestial
mechanics, an object moving in this shape has velocity square root of two G M over r, and capture
orbits and escape orbits have this shape. A charge moving straight when entering a uniform electric
(*) field will travel in this shape. Lenses in this shape so no spherical aberration, since they focus all
parallel rays at a point. For 10 points, name this shape, which is also traced out by a projectile fired into the
air at an angle with no air resistance.
ANSWER: parabolic [or parabola or paraboloid]
One of these statements concerns the apparent ages of binary stars like Algol. One of these situations
that concerns the apparent contraction of the radius of a rapidly rotating disc is named for
Ehrenfest, while another concerns the apparent lack of information conservation at the event horizon
of a black hole. One named for (*) Olbers concerns the darkness of the night sky despite the number of
stars in the universe, while another concerns a pair of twins, one of whom boards a spaceship. For 10 points,
name these seemingly contradictory situations.
ANSWER: paradoxes
One idea of this type can be formally stated by commuting time reversal and ensemble average operators on
the equation of motion for a single particle. Another statement of this kind is commonly treated by
introducing a term proportional to the logarithm of the particle number factorial, which corresponds to
distinguishability of mixing particles. In addition to those named for Loschmidt and Gibbs, one of these
says that a set cannot be a member of itself. For 10 points, name these statements that lead to scientific
contradictions, examples of which include Russell's and the twin one, a consequence of special relativity.
ANSWER: paradoxes
Friedrich Bessel first successfully determined the stellar form for 61 Cygni in 1838. The Hipparcos satellite
has used this technique on over 100,000 nearby stars, and it is featured in the definition of the parsec.
Human depth perception also functions by this method, in which separate observers measure a difference in
the angular position of an object. FTP, name this method for determining distances to stars by triangulation.
ANSWER: parallax
The secular and statistical varieties of this quantity can be obtained from the upsilon and tau components of
proper motion relative to the local standard of rest. An application of the mass-luminosity relationship to
observations of visual binaries yields the dynamical version of this quantity. While trying to measure this
quantity for Eltana, James Bradley discovered the aberration of starlight. It precedes main-sequence fitting
and standard candles on the cosmic distance ladder, giving accurate results out to a few hundred light years.
A maximum baseline of 2 AU limits the trigonometric version of, FTP, this method for measuring
astronomical distances using apparent shifts in position.
ANSWER: parallax
A dynamical one may be taken by first applying Kepler's third law and the mass-luminosity relation for a
binary system. Spectral and luminosity class data are employed with a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram and the
distance modulus in the spectroscopic type. Generally, it relies on taking two measurements separated by
six months of a star's position, finding the angle that separates them, and relying on the small angle
approximation. For 10 points, identify this method of distance determination, whose namesake unit is
around three point two six light-years.
ANSWER: parallax
One important constant describing these materials is proportional to the square of the Lande gfactor and the Bohr magneton times J times J plus 1. Molecular orbital theory is required to show
that diatomic oxygen is one of these materials, and one law describing these materials contain an
additional theta term describing exchange interactions. The Neel-Arrhenius law describes the
"super" version of this property, which occurs in ferrofluids, and these materials obey the Curie-Weiss
law. For 10 points, name these materials characterized by a magnetic susceptibility greater than 1, which
become magnetised only in response to an external field.
ANSWER: Paramagnetism
Invitrogen Dynabeads have this property and are useful for immunoprecipitation assays, and nanobeads
with this property can be used for solid-phase cDNA generation. MRI contrast agents often have this
property, and a gas of monatomic hydrogen atoms would display a pure form of it. Molecular orbital theory
is required to show that diatomic oxygen has it. Ferrofluids display the super- form of this behavior, which
is described by the equation M equals chi times H, in which chi is positive. This property occurs above the
Curie and Neel temperatures in certain materials, in which spins are randomly aligned until an external field
is applied. For 10 points, name this type of magnetism.
ANSWER: Paramagnetism
The law governing this phenomenon in one regime has a coefficient equal to C divided by the
quantity T minus theta, where theta accounts for the exchange interaction. Gadolinium-containing
MRI contrast agents show the "super" version of this phenomenon. It is displayed by all high-spin
coordination complexes. This phenomenon arises in materials with positive susceptibility. This
phenomenon, which is described by the linear Curie-Weiss law, arises in systems with (*) unpaired
electrons and in ferromagnets above the Curie temperature. It arises when dipoles align in the same
direction as an applied field. For 10 points, name this property of some materials in which they are attracted
by external magnetic fields, often contrasted with diamagnetism.
ANSWER: paramagnetism [or word forms, like paramagnetic or paramagnets]
Langevin's law says that the magnetic force on a membrane with this property is always attractive,
and the deflection of a membrane with this property is proportional to the gradient of the square of an
external magnetic field. Above the Curie point, ferromagnetic substances have this property, which also
applies to liquid oxygen and other molecules with unpaired electrons. For 10 points, name this type of
magnetism in which a material becomes magnetic in the presence of an external magnetic field, which
is stronger than diamagnetism.
ANSWER: paramagnetism [or paramagnetic; prompt on magnetism]
Materials with the "super" form of this property include Dynabeads and single-domain nanoparticles. This
property is observed above the Neel [ney-EL] and Curie temperatures. Materials with this property have
their unpaired electrons aligned, but unlike in ferromagnetism, the magnetic moments of the atoms are not
aligned with each other. For 10 points, name this form of magnetism in which materials have a positive
susceptibility, unlike in diamagnetism.
ANSWER: paramagnetism [accept word forms; prompt on "magnetism"]
This phenomenon is responsible for constraints such as relaxation enhancements in determining the solution
structures of molecules that exhibit it, and Commoner et al. used it to detect free radicals in biological
systems by employing its namesake refinement strategy. The weakest form of this effect, named after Pauli,
occurs when electrons are delocalized throughout the solid, and it follows Weiss's law, which includes an
interaction term that is attenuated by thermal motion. It occurs in elements with unpaired electrons, and
liquid oxygen is a well known material exhibiting this property. Occuring in ferromagnets below the Curie
point, FTP identify this phenomenon that occurs when a material becomes temporarily magnetized in
parallel with a magnetic field, and is contrasted from diamagnetism.
ANSWER: paramagnetism
The strength of this phenomenon in an atom is proportional to a function containing a "hyperbolic
cotangent of x over 2J" term; that function is the Brillouin function, which is replaced in the classical
formulation by the Langevin function. Second order perturbation theory includes a variety of this
phenomenon named for Van Vleck, and the spin of free electrons on a crystal lattice causes a variant
of this phenomenon named for (*) Pauli. In certain materials experiencing this phenomenon, the
susceptibility is given by "C over (T minus T sub c)," and the susceptibility is inversely proportional to
absolute temperature according to Curie's Law. This phenomenon occurs above the Neel temperature as
well as above the Curie temperature, and it is caused by the aligning of dipoles. For 10 points, name this
weak form of magnetism only present in an external magnetic field.
ANSWER: paramagnetism
Electron Spin Resonance Spectroscopy is a technique that only works on species that exhibit this property.
Molecular Orbital Theory correctly predicts this property in oxygen molecules, contrary to the Lewis dot
structure of oxygen. For 10 points, name this chemical property in which an unpaired electron causes the
molecule to be weakly attracted to an external magnetic field.
ANSWER: paramagnetism (accept paramagnetic)
In photochemical reactions, triplet transition states but not singlets have this property, and Neel relaxation is
observed in particles exhibiting the "super-" form of it. A Brillouin (BREEL-won) curve plots changes in
this property against the ratio of auxiliary field strength to temperature, and the behavior of materials with
this property is approximated by Curie's law. These objects do not demonstrate hysteresis (his-tur-EE-sis)
but do have a permeability stronger than that of free space. Free radicals and liquid oxygen demonstrate this
property because it is the result of the spins of unpaired electrons. Name this property of substances which
only become magnetized within an applied magnetic field.
ANSWER: paramagnetism [accept word forms; prompt on magnetism before "susceptibility"]
The SBM theory attempts to describe enhanced nuclear relaxation in NMR in the presence of dissolved
ionic species with this property; in that theory, ions with this property contribute unpaired electron density
to enhance relaxation. Zavoisky discovered the resonant absorption of microwaves by materials exhibiting
this property in a constant field, which is the underlying principle of electron spin resonance. It is exhibited
by materials with a positive magnetic susceptibility, and is often observed in materials with unpaired
electrons, exemplified by liquid oxygen. For 10 points, identify this behavior which occurs when a material
becomes weakly magnetized in a parallel orientation to the applied magnetic field.
ANSWER: paramagnetism [accept word forms]
A transition that preserves this quantity in a centrosymmetric molecule cannot preserve symmetry or
asymmetry about an inversion center according to Laporte's rule. A Majorana neutrino would have
an imaginary value for this quantity. For a nucleon, this quantity is equal to negative one to the L.
The operator corresponding to this value has eigenvalues of one or negative one. The tau-theta puzzle
was solved by noting that this value is (*) not conserved in some kaon decays. The product of this
quantity with the charge and timereversal symmetry is always conserved, though C.S. Wu showed that its
product with charge isn-t conserved in the beta decay of cobalt-60. This symmetry corresponds to flipping a
wavefunction from psi of x to psi of negative x. For 10 points, name this symmetry of a variable or a system
which can be either even or odd.
ANSWER: parity
Fixed-field alternating gradient ones are employed in anti-cancer proton therapy. Early examples
used sulfur hexafluoride to apply a static voltage of around thirty megavolts, while oscillating
voltages are employed in more modern linear examples. One type of this structure employs a pair of
D-shaped plates in conjunction with a single powerful (*) magnet. Mundane examples include cathode
ray tubes, and many of these devices benefit from storage rings, particularly those that collide two beams.
For 10 points, name these machines, which include the Tevatron and the Large Hadron Collider.
ANSWER: particle accelerators
The eigenenergies of this system are quantized in units of h-bar squared times pi squared over the product
of two times the mass and the characteristic length dimension, and are also proportional to the square of the
principal quantum number. In this system, outside the region where the potential is finite, the eigenfunctions
of this system are evanescent waves described by decaying exponentials. Inside the finite potential of this
system, the solutions are families of sines and cosines. This model quantum mechanical system's
Hamiltonian is given by momentum squared over twice the mass, plus a potential which is zero from zero to
some distance L along the x-axis, and infinite everywhere else. For 10 points, identify this model system in
which the infinite potential confines a single particle within a rectangular region.
ANSWER: particle in a box [accept infinite square well; or infinite potential well; prompt on "square well"; prompt on "potential well"]
Excitons in a conjugated polymer can be approximated using it by adding a term for Coulombic force and
applying the linear combination of atomic orbitals across the length of the polymer. An n-dimensional
version of it will have energy levels of n degeneracy, and if the constraints of this system allow, tunneling
can be also be solved for. The Hamiltonian for it is simplified because the potential energy term can be
omitted, which allows the set of eigenvalues to be solved exactly, making it useful for modeling more
complex systems and as a teaching tool. The wave function is sinusoidal in, for 10 points, what hypothetical
construct in quantum mechanics, in which the title entity is confined to a limited space.
ANSWER: Particle in a box [accept particle in an infinite potential well or particle in an infinite square well]
An analogy to this situation in lattices is called the Bloch state, and the nuclear shell model for the
atomic nucleus can be approximated by solving the Schrodinger equation for a hybrid of the
harmonic oscillator and this (*) type of system. It is a reduction of the negative delta function potential in
the limits of a large width and shallow depth. The energy eigenvalues for this system can be derived using
de Broglie's equation and are given by h-squared n-squared over 8-m-l-squared, while its eigenfunctions are
analogous to a vibrating string. For 10 points, identify this simple potential from quantum mechanics in
which a particle is constrained between two infinitely large potential barriers.
ANSWER: particle in a box potential [accept infinite square well before mentioned]
Using this system to model solvated electrons in a solution of lithium in ammonia correctly derives the
wavelength of said solution's color. Modeling an alpha particle in a nucleus as this system leads to the
Geiger-Nuttall formula. Assuming a deep well in the quantum-confined Stark effect allows the estimation of
its energies by treating it as this system, while an iterated version of this system in one dimension gives the
Kronig-Penny model. The square root of 2 over L is the normalizing constant for this system, whose energy
levels correspond to n squared h squared over 8 m L. For 10 points, name this quantum system in which an
object is trapped in a square container.
ANSWER: Particle in a Box [or [in]finite Potential Well; or Square Well; or Rectangular well]
According to the Lee-Yang theorem, in the Ising model this expression has all imaginary zeros.
Peirels showed that the logarithm of this expression is not analytic at a phase transition. This
expression is equal to the trace of the transfer matrix. The derivative of the natural logarithm of this
expression with respect to beta gives the expected value for the energy. This expression is used to
normalize the probability of a particular state, and it can be used to calculate the free energy of a (*)
canonical ensemble. The natural log of it times negative kT gives the Helmholtz free energy. It is equal to
the sum over all Boltzmann factors, or the sum of the function e to the negative beta times energy summed
over all microstates. For 10 points, name this value from statistical mechanics symbolized Z.
ANSWER: partition function [or Z before mentioned]
For a spin glass, the natural log of this function can be computed using the replica trick. This value is
expanded into a power series in the Mayer cluster expansion. For a gas of N identical particles, this value is
equal to 1 over the quantity N factorial times h to the 3N all times an integral. Taking the derivative of the
log of this quantity with respect to the thermodynamic beta can be used to prove the result that each degree
of freedom of a system contributes the same amount of energy to a system. This quantity is the sum over all
of the Boltzmann factors of a system, and its natural log is multiplied by negative kT to give the Helmholtz
free energy. For 10 points, name this value important in describing canonical ensembles in statistical
mechanics, symbolized Z.
ANSWER: partition function [accept Z before mention]
One quantity called this and analogous to its classical variety is calculated by performing a Wick
rotation on the generating functional of the correlation function of a Lagrangian and a source term
yields. This quantity arises from the path integral by considering only closed paths over a time
interval negative i h-bar times thermodynamic (*) beta. The Helmholtz free energy is proportional to the
log of this quantity, and the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distributions are normalized by dividing by this
quantity, which is given as the sum over microstates of e to negative beta times the state's energy. For 10
points, name this function symbolized Z that gives macroscopic information based on ways of dividing up
microstates.
ANSWER: partition function
If this quantity is a finite polynomial in the activity, z, its zeroes on the complex z plane only occur as
conjugate pairs or for negative, real z, so there is a singularity or branch cut for positive, real z as
shown by Lee and Yang. It can be found by taking the Laplace transform of the density of states or
the trace of the density matrix. Each quadratic degree of freedom in a system's Hamiltonian
contributes root pi k T over a constant to this quantity. The expected value for the energy of a system
is the negative partial derivative of its (*) log with respect to 1 over k T. Its reciprocal often appears as a
normalization factor, such as in the probability of a microstate. For 10 points, name this function from
statistical mechanics that is symbolized Z and can be used to find most of the macroscopic properties of a
system.
ANSWER: grand partition function [or Z until it is read; prompt on Q, xi, Y]
In a fluid at rest, this principle requires that the components on the diagonal of the stress tensor
be equal. This principle is often proven geometrically for a static fluid at rest by considering a
triangular prism, or wedge. Due to this principle, the ratio of two forces must equal the ratio of the
area over which they are applied in a hydraulic pump. It was apocryphally demonstrated by pouring
water into a ten meter high tube attached to a barrel already filled with water, causing the barrel to
promptly (*) explode. This principle is often stated mathematically as fluid density times acceleration due
to gravity times difference in height equals difference in pressure. For 10 points, name this law which states
that the pressure exerted anywhere in a fluid is evenly distributed throughout and is named for Frenchman.
ANSWER: Pascal's law [or Pascal's principle; or the isotropy of pressure]
This physicist developed a regularization method of introducing a spectrum of auxiliary particles and
taking the limit as their masses go to infinity with Felix Villars. That method is preferred to
dimensional regularization when considering chiral phenomena. He proved the result that symmetry
or antisymmetry under exchange corresponded to (*) integer or half-integer spin, the spin-statistics
theorem. His best-known result creates the "degeneracy pressure" that keeps sufficiently low mass white
dwarfs from collapsing. For 10 points, name this physicist who discovered that no two fermions can occupy
the same quantum state, his namesake exclusion principle.
ANSWER: Wolfgang Ernst Pauli [accept Felix Villars before mention]
With Breit, this scientist names a two-component approximation that ignores terms larger than order
of the speed of light squared. That approximation breaks down for elements larger than the 2nd
transition metal row and simplifies the four-component Dirac equation. Any two components of this
scientist's namesake matrices have a commutation relation that is proportional to the third
component of the matrices, which are the same commutation relationships as angular momentum.
Those 2 by 2 matrices symbolized (*) sigma are multiplied by the reduced Planck's constant divided by
two to give the spin operator. More famously, he described a rule that says two identical particles with
 antisymmetric wavefunctions cannot occupy the same single particle state. That means the same quantum state
cannot be occupied by two identical fermions. For 10 points, name this man who formulated a famous
exclusion principle.
ANSWER: Wolfgang Pauli
This man's namesake effect refers to the likelihood of lab equipment failure while he was in the
room. He proved the spin-statistics theorem, and explained the apparent violation of conservation of
energy and momentum in beta decay by proposing the (*) neutrino. His best-known contribution applies
to fermions and states that no two of them can have the same quantum state. For 10 points, name this 1945
Nobel Laureate in Physics, who has an eponymous Exclusion Principle.
ANSWER: Wolfgang Ernst Pauli
This man's namesake effect refers to the likelihood of lab equipment failure while he was in the
room. He proved the spin-statistics theorem, and explained the apparent violation of conservation of
energy and momentum in beta decay by proposing the (*) neutrino. His best-known contribution applies
to fermions and states that no two of them can have the same quantum state. For 10 points, name this 1945
Nobel Laureate in Physics, who has an eponymous Exclusion Principle.
ANSWER: Wolfgang Ernst Pauli
One set of mathematical constructs named for this man are Hermitian and unitary, and thus correspond to
the observables of the complex Hilbert space with two dimensions. This man used the conservation of
energy and momentum in beta decay to theorize the existence of the neutrino. He names a set of three
matrices that describe spin, and one of his results explains why neutron stars below the Tolman-
Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit don-t collapse. That principle concerns the anti-symmetric quantum states of
fermions, explaining why electrons with the same spin cannot occupy the same orbital. For 10 points, name
this Austrian theoretical physicist with a namesake Exclusion Principle.
ANSWER: Wolfgang Pauli
This person used relativistic invariance as the basis for his proof of the spin-statistics theorem. A
statement of this man is often proven by considering that the wavefunction for some particles must
be antisymmetric with respect to the exchange of some variables. The pressure that opposes
gravitational collapse in white dwarfs is due to that statement. This scientist proposed that the
energy, momentum, and spin of (*) beta decay could be conserved by the introduction of an additional
particle: the neutrino. His best known statement does not apply to bosons, but rather particles with
half-integer spin. For 10 points, name this scientist whose most famous statement requires that electrons in
the same orbital have different spin quantum numbers, which is his "exclusion principle".
ANSWER: Wolfgang Pauli
This man names a method of removing divergent terms from a field theory by adding fictitious
particles, a regularization also named Villars. He names a non-Curie-law behavior that occurs when
electrons near the Fermi level respond to an external field; that is his namesake paramagnetism. One
set of constructs named for this man are both Hermitian and unitary and are a set of three (*)
matrices that, when multiplied by h-bar over two, function as spin operators. The 12th-power term in the
Lennard-Jones potential occurs due to one law named for him. That law can be derived from the fact that
switching the columns in a Slater determinant changes the sign, and is the origin of the degeneracy pressure
that prevents white dwarf collapse. For 10 points, name this physicist who said no two fermions could have
the same set of quantum numbers in his exclusion principle.
ANSWER: Wolfgang Pauli [accept Felix Villars before mention]
This man and Villars name a regularization technique used to regulate divergence of loop integrals. He is
also the namesake of 2 by 2 matrices used to describe the spin of a particle, and this man first hypothesized
the existence of neutrinos. The degeneracy pressure that prevents all collapsing stars from forming black
holes is a consequence of this man's most famous statement that wave functions of electrons should be
antisymmetric. For 10 points, identify this German scientist who proposed that the same four quantum
numbers cannot be held by two electrons in the same spatial state in his namesake exclusion principle.
ANSWER: Wolfgang Pauli
It calls for an even number of protons and neutrons according to the liquid drop model, and it is also
expressed in the Wiezsaecker formula, and it described the necessity for a colour quantum number
for the quarks. Another important conclusion of it is the formation of the "Fermi-level" when a metal
is cooled to absolute zero. This statement also describes why the degeneracy pressure helps white dwarves
survive, and it was first posited to explain some anomalous spectroscopic results observed in the Zeeman
effect. For 10 points, identify this statement which states that no two Fermions can possess the same set of
quantum numbers.
ANSWER: Pauli Exclusion principle
It leads to the Fermi level in the band theory of solids, used in conductors and semi-conductors. Another
consequence of this uses an anti-symmetrical matrix and leads to the Slater determinant. One consequence
of this statement in astrophysics is known as electron and neutron degeneracy. It does not apply to some
particles of whole integer spin such as photons and gluons known as bosons, but it does to all those with
half integer spin, known as fermions, which include electrons. FTP, name this rule that states no two
electrons in an atom may have the same set of quantum numbers.
ANSWER: Pauli Exclusion Principle
A requirement of this result is satisfied by constructing wavefunctions with a Slater determinant. This is the
cause of the repulsive short-range twelfth-power term in the Lennard-Jones potential, as well as the
degeneracy pressure that keeps white dwarfs stable. Ehrenfest posited that this result is what gives matter
volume, since it prevents atoms from being placed too close together. Wavefunctions must be antisymmetric
under exchange due to this principle, which only applies to fermions. It explains why two electrons in the
same orbital must have opposite spin, since they cannot occupy the same state. For 10 points, name this
"exclusion" principle named for an Austrian physicist.
ANSWER: Pauli exclusion principle [prompt on "exclusion" principle]
This principle is expressed in the Wiezsaecker formula, calling for asymmetry energy. Oscar
Greenberg proposed the necessity for a color quantum number in quarks to account for this
principle. In the Lennard-Jones potential, the negative twelfth power dependence is a result of this
principle. Electron degeneracy pressure in white dwarfs is a result of this statement, which applies
only to half-integer spin particles, (*) fermions. One often-cited result of it is that two electrons in the
same orbital will have opposite spin. For ten points, name this principle that states that no two particles may
occupy the same quantum state, named for an Austrian.
ANSWER: Pauli Exclusion Principle
Slater determinants are used to ensure a system obeys this principle, and Oscar Greenberg
proposed the concept of color to account for it. White dwarfs are prevented from collapsing into
black holes by electron degeneracy pressure, a consequence of this principle. It only applies to
particles with antisymmetric wave functions, and thus, (*) bosons are not governed by this principle,
while fermions are. For 10 points, name this principle that results in no two electrons being able to occupy
identical quantum states.
ANSWER: Pauli exclusion principle
This principle cannot apply to particles that have symmetric wavefunctions, such as photons, which are
classed together as bosons, as opposed to particles that do follow this principle known as fermions.
According to this principle, the magnetic, principal, orbital, and spin quantum numbers cannot all be shared
in an atom. For 10 points, name this principle that explains why two electrons in an orbital must have
opposite spins.
ANSWER: Pauli Exclusion Principle
This statement contributes to the repulsive one over r to the twelfth term in the Lennard-Jones Potential. Its
rigorous statement requires that particles with half-integer spin have anti-symmetrical wave functions, and it
also explains neutron degeneracy, which prevents smaller neutron stars from collapsing into black holes.
The "+1" term seen in the denominator of the Fermi-Dirac distribution arises due to this statement, and
bosons do not have to obey it, but fermions such as protons and electrons do. For 10 points, name this law
of quantum mechanics, which states that no two identical fermions can occupy the same quantum state at
the same time.
ANSWER: Pauli exclusion principle
The EPR paradox requires that either this principle or locality must be broken. One of the consequences of
this principle is the existence of the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit of neutron starsm because it
provides for the degeneracy pressure that supports them. Although bosons do not obey it, this law applies
for
all particles governed by Fermi-Dirac statistics. For 10 points, what principle, which states that no two
fermions can share all four quantum numbers, forces electrons in the same subshell to have different spin?
ANSWER: Pauli Exclusion Principle
This statement implies that for the liquid drop model, isotopes with unequal numbers of protons and
neutrons will have a lower binding energy that decreases with the square of the number difference. This
statement can be mathematically represented by determinants composed of spin orbitals, which change sign
upon permutation of rows. Another consequence of it is the electron degeneracy pressure that supports the
formation of white dwarfs, and it implies that electrons occupying the same orbital must have opposite
spins. For 10 points, identify this statement which implies that no two fermions can possess the same
quantum numbers, developed by an Austria physicist.
ANSWER: Pauli exclusion principle
The term raised to the negative twelfth power in the Lennard-Jones potential accounts for this rule.
White dwarfs exhibit electron degeneracy pressure, a factor limiting how much they can compress based on
this rule. In general, this rule applies to half-spin particles called fermions meaning two particles can
occupy the same region if and only if they have opposing spins. For 10 points, name this rule of quantum
mechanics typically stated as no two electrons can have the same four quantum numbers.
ANSWER: Pauli exclusion principle
In superconductors, this effect disappears in the absence of a magnetic field an in the Meissner state
because Cooper pairs do not carry entropy, though it exists in the mixed state. The coefficient governing
this effect can be determined through the first Kelvin relation, and like its inverse, this effect vanishes when
the Hall angle is zero. Since this effect depends on polarity, it can be used for either heating or cooling, and
the energy difference associated with it is the sum of the energy associated with the Thomson effect and this
effect's inverse. For ten points, identify this thermoelectric effect in which a current flowing through a
junction between two different metals results in a temperature change, the inverse of the Seebeck effect.
ANSWER: Peltier effect or Peltier-Seebeck effect [do not prompt on "Seebeck effect" alone]
One was a component of a seismometer used by Han dynasty scientist Zhang Heng. Robert Hooke
suggested one could be used to measure the force of gravity.Pierre Bouguer used one the produce
measurements used to estimate the density of the Earth. Foucault used one to demonstrate Earth's rotation.
Galileo found their periods were independent of both swing amplitude and mass. FTP, name this device,
commonly found in metronomes and grandfather clocks, consisting of a freely swinging weight on a rod.
ANSWER: pendulum
The Jacobi elliptic functions can be used to calculate this device's kinetic equations. A T-shaped one is
known as Rott's type of this, which like the double type, illustrates chaotic behavior. One can calculate the
initial velocity of the bullet using gravitational potential energy with the ballistic one. An approximation of
sin theta equals theta simplifies equations involving this device, such as calculating its period to be two pi
times the square root of length over gravity. For 10 points, name this device which was used to show
rotation of the earth by Foucault.
ANSWER: pendulum
One of the fundamental parameters of this system is given by the complete elliptic integral of the first
kind with modulus sine half maximum displacement and upper bound maximum displacement, times
the inverse of the natural frequency. A seperatrix in the phase space of these systems exists at
maximum displacement pi. The aforementioned expression for a fundamental parameter of these
may be obtained by separating the equation of motion's first integral, which contains a squared time
derivative of position; that expression gives the (*) period. Two of these attached to one another is an
archetypical chaotic system. For small maximum displacements, the sine term in the equation of motion for
this system can be approximated as linear, which allows these systems to be modeled as harmonic
oscillators. For 10 points, name these exceeding common physical model systems.
ANSWER: physical pendula [or physical pendulums; accept bobs]
An experiment using a ballistic type of this object can be run to figure out the speed of a bullet. With a
large angle, a double type of this object will exhibit chaotic motion. The period of a simple one of these
objects is equal to two pi times the square root of this object's length over the acceleration of gravity. For
10 points, name these objects that could in ideal situations display simple harmonic motion and which often
consist of a mass on a string swinging from a fixed point.
ANSWER: pendulums
A bullet's speed can be determined using the "ballistic" type of this object. Two of them can be
coupled to exhibit chaotic motion, and Foucault used one to show the Earth rotates. A simple
formula, requiring the small-angle approximation, states that one's (*) period depends only on its
length and on gravity, not on the mass or amplitude of oscillation. For 10 points, name this object, a weight
suspended by a string often found in clocks.
ANSWER: pendulums
The Blackburn variety of these objects can be represented with the Lissajous curve, and their Q factors
include a gamma factor in the denominator due to Archimedes's principle and air resistance. Though it
breaks down at high amplitudes, the small angle approximation allows the period of these systems to be
represented as 2 pi times the square root of L over the acceleration due to gravity. A common use of these
objects is to knock over dominoes or to trace lines in the sand to demonstrate the rotation of the earth. For
10 points, name these systems which feature a
suspended weight swinging freely from a fixed point, including a variety named for Leon Foucault.
ANSWER: pendulums [Accept pendula. Prompt on simple harmonic oscillator before mention.]
The Jacobi elliptic functions are used to solve this system, which traces out an ellipse in phase
space. The height displacement of one of these is used in ballistics to measure bullet speed. Gravity
and tension are the only two forces that work on these systems to restore them to (*) equilibrium
where they have no potential energy. These simple harmonic oscillators are composed of a bob attached to
a pivot. For 10 points, name these systems found in certain types of old clocks.
ANSWER: pendulums
One of these devices rotating in a plane perpendicular to an attached driven arm is also known as its single
rotary inverted variety, and was invented by Furuta. Persoz and Konig used these devices to measure
material hardness. Rott's type of these devices are used to illustrate chaotic behavior. The restoring torque
equals negative kappa times theta for the torsion variety of these devices, and their periods are given as 2 pi
times the square root of their length over g. The rotation of the Earth was demonstrated by Foucault using,
tor ten points, these simple harmonic oscillators consisting of a weight swinging on a pivot.
ANSWER: pendulum
A physical model of one of these objects yields a term for angular frequency proportional to the square root
of the product of mass and the distance between its center of gravity and the pivot, approximating harmonic
motion. A simple model of its motion holds that the square root of the gravitational constant over its length
is equal to the wavelength. One type of this apparatus was set up by its namesake to demonstrate the
rotation of the earth. FTP, name this physical device consisting of a weight on a string, an example of which
is named for Foucault.
ANSWER: Pendulum
One form of this device that makes use of a helical spring and an object with two protruding vanes is
named for Lionel Robert Wilberforce. Another setup, which is the coupled form of this device, connects
two individual types of this object by a spring. Connecting two of these devices directly to one another can
represent chaotic movement in the double variety of this object. For 10 points, name this type of object that
most simply consists of a mass connected to a string that can swing in simple harmonic motion.
ANSWER: pendulums
Attaching two of these devices end to end creates a chaotic device whose trajectories trace out part of a
topological torus. The generic equation of motion for these devices is "theta-double-dot equals negative k
times sine theta", assuming there are no extended masses present, as in the "compound" type of this device.
One type of these devices picks up a geometric phase as the Earth rotates, causing it to precess; that type is
named for Foucault. The period of these devices equals "2 pi times root (length over small g)". For 10
points, name this simple device consisting of a weight suspended from a string, which exhibit approximate
simple harmonic motion.
ANSWER: pendulum [accept simple pendulum; accept Foucault's pendulum; accept double pendulum]
For this device, calculating T ("big-T") requires knowing the moment of inertia if this device is compound.
If this device is simple, then T is given by two pi times the square root of L over g. When this device's range
of motion is small, it approximates simple harmonic motion. Name this device, consisting of an object
attached to a massless rod oscillating back and forth.
ANSWER: pendulum
The Melnikov-Arnold Integral is used to describe the motion of this system along a particular
trajectory, and the complete description of this physical system requires using the elliptic integral of
the first kind. In phase space, this system has a separatrix at maximum displacement pi, and the
trajectories are elliptical for small initial angles and sinusoidal above and below 1 and negative 1.
The equation of motion for this system is theta double prime plus omega sub not squared times sin
theta. A classic chaotic system is two of these attached to each other. The equations for this system can be
simplified using the small-angle approximation to remove the sine term, giving the period of one of these as
two pi times the square root of L over g. For 10 points, name this type of simple harmonic oscillator
consisting of a bob at the end of a string.
ANSWER: Pendulum (Prompt on "harmonic oscillator" or "simple harmonic oscillator")
The approximation for the period of these objects must include an infinite expansion when dealing the
large amplitude variety of this object. Chaotic systems can be displayed by setting a large one of these into
motion. The period of the simple type of this object equals two pi times the square root of its length over
gravity. One type of this object is used to show the rotation of the earth and is named for Foucault
(foo-KOH). For 10 points, name this physical object often demonstrated using a swinging mass suspended
by a string.
ANSWER: pendulums [or large amplitude pendulums; or double pendulums; or simple pendulums; o Foucault pendulums]
The phase space for these objects shows a separatrix at pi. A spring and a disk are used in the torsion
version of these devices. Chaotic systems are exemplified by a "double" one of them. The period of these
objects is proportional to the square root of the length over gravitational acceleration for small
displacements. One of these that demonstrates the rotation of the Earth is named for Foucault (foo-COH).
For 10 points, name these simple harmonic oscillators that consist of a bob on the end of a string.
ANSWER: pendulum
Kater's variety of this device can be used to find the local gravitational acceleration, and the double
variety exemplifies chaotic motion. The Foucault variety of this device proves that the Earth is
rotating, and the period of a simple one of these devices is equal to 2 pi times the square root of L
over g. Their behavior can be approximated as (*) simple harmonic motion when the small-angle
approximation holds and the amplitude is small. For ten points, what is this device commonly used in
physics, in which a weight is suspended from a pivot point by a string, allowing it to swing back and forth?
ANSWER: Pendulum
These systems can be mathematically described by using an elliptic integral to solve a second-order
differential equation; those solutions are often simplified to a linear description by using Taylor expansion
to replace the sine theta term with theta for small angles. The period of these systems can be approximated
as two pi times the square root of length over gravitational acceleration. The double kind of these exhibits
chaotic motion, and one of these used to demonstrate the rotation of the Earth was named for Foucault. For
10 points, name these physical systems used to model simple harmonic motion that consist of a mass
connected to a string.
ANSWER: Pendulums [accept Pendula; prompt on Simple Harmonic Oscillators before "length"]
These systems are isochronous and always have one resonant frequency when modeled using the smallangle approximation. The "double" variant of these systems exhibits chaotic motion. The precession of a
large one of these systems due to the Coriolis force proves that the Earth rotates. A basic way to model
these systems considers them as simple harmonic oscillators. For 10 points, name these physical systems
consisting of oscillating hanging weights, an example of which is named for Leon Foucault.
ANSWER: pendulums
Holmes and Marsden used the Melnikov formalism to show that coupling perturbations in this system
render it non-integrable due to the introductions of horseshoes, which are intersections between stable and
unstable manifolds. The differential equation describing the dynamics of a nonlinear one of these systems
contains a term proportional to the sine of the angle, which means that displacement of such a system is
proportional to an elliptic integral of the first kind. A linear variant of this system avoids that complication
by Taylor expanding around the equilibrium point and assuming small-angle oscillations, which gives a
period of two pi times the square root of the length over the gravitational acceleration. Also exhibiting
chaos when two of these are connected in a "double" variant, for ten points, identify this dynamical system,
a harmonic oscillator consisting of a weight on a massless rod.
ANSWER: pendulum [accept harmonic oscillator before "nonlinear"]
One mode of motion for this system was approximated by Chirikov using the Melnikov-Arnold
integral. The Gudermannian can be used to derive its motion near unstable equilibria. A complete
description of this system requires the use of Jacobi elliptic functions. In phase space, this system has
a separatrix at H equals g over l, within which it has closed cycles and outside of which it is
sinusoidal. These devices' amplitude is independent of their (*) period. The equation of motion for this
system is often derived using the small-angle approximation, and shows that its period is proportional to the
square root of the length of the string. For 10 points, name this simple system consisting of a weight on the
end of a string.
ANSWER: pendulum
The Mathieu functions of even order are the characteristic functions of this system on the quantum level.
Braginsky, Polnarev and Thorne proposed using it to measure the earth's general relativistic
gravitomagnetic field. When modeling this system, a common approximation is for sin theta to equal theta;
this only holds for small amplitudes. The "physical" version differs from the "simple" version in that the
"string" of the "mass on a string" has some mass. For 10 points, name this physical system, often used to
demonstrate simple harmonic motion?
ANSWER: Pendulum (prompt on "simple harmonic oscillator" since I think the first clue pertains only to the physical pendulum but haven't been able to verify)
The period of the "physical" type of one of these devices is inversely proportional to the square root
of the distance from the pivot to the center of gravity. A "cycloidal" one has a constant period for all
amplitudes, while a normal one has a constant period only if the small angle approximation is used.
One named for (*) Foucault can be used to demonstrate Earth's rotation without any astronomical
observations. When two of these devices are linked together, a "double" one is formed which displays
chaotic motion. For 10 points, name this device which consists of a weight suspended from a pivot.
ANSWER: Pendulum
The radius of gyration for one of these objects is equal to I over mass times radius, while two pi times
the square root of I over mass times radius times the local gravitational acceleration is equal to the period
for one of these objects, which Galileo believed was independent of starting point. One of these objects was
used to show that the Earth rotates by Foucault. For 10 points, name these objects that are made up of a
swinging mass at the end of a rope.
ANSWER: pendulum
A system named for Rott features has two of these structures with horizontal SFP and BFPs at stable
equilibria. In the phase-space representation for the system, the upper-half of the separatrix shows solutions
for these systems starting at their inverted positions. Two coupled ones are commonly used to represent
chaotic systems. When their displacements are assumed to be small, the sine theta term in the equation is
approximated to theta. Another of these was used to demonstrate the rotation of the earth and was named
for Foucault. For 10 points, identify these physical systems which can be used to model simple harmonic
motions, and which swing back and forth in some clocks.
ANSWER: pendulum [or pendula]
The generalized form of this system involves a mass acted upon only by gravity on a frictionless
sphere. The double form of this system exhibits chaotic motion. For small angles, the period of one of
these devices is equal to two pi times the square root of its length over the gravitational acceleration.
(*) Foucault used one of these items to demonstrate the rotation of the Earth. For 10 points, what device
consists of a mass placed at the end of a string that moves back and forth.
ANSWER: pendulum
One of these devices named for Persoz can measure a sample's hardness. The double type of this object is a
classic example of chaotic behavior. A useful approximation when working with these objects involves
assuming that "sin theta equals theta." These objects have period approximately equal to "two pi times the
square root of quantity length over gravitational acceleration." These devices exhibit simple harmonic
motion, and one of these was used to show the rotation of the earth by Leon Foucault. For 10 points, name
these devices consisting of a weight suspended from a pivot.
ANSWER: pendulums
The inertial guidance systems of aircraft are based on a hypothetical one of these devices named for
Schuler, and the traditional seismograph contains one these to measure motion relative to the ground. A
double one of these devices serves as a model of chaotic motion, and Benjamin Robins invented the
ballistic type to find the velocities of projectiles. For the simple type of this device, sine theta is
approximated as theta to determine small amplitude periods, and Galileo found that its period depends on
length but not mass. Used by Foucault (foo-KOH) to demonstrate the rotation of the Earth, name this device
that shows simple harmonic motion and can be made by hanging a weight from a string.
ANSWER: pendulum
A double one of these devices exhibits chaotic motion. Bullet speed can be calculated with a "ballistic" one
of these devices, while a "physical" one has a massive rod. The one of Foucault's demonstrated that the
earth rotated, and it is helpful to use the approximation sin theta equals theta for problems involving this
system. Exhibiting simple harmonic motion, for 10 points, name this device, the simplest of which is a bob
at the end of a string.
ANSWER: pendulum
Two of these devices are combined to build a harmonograph, which can be used to draw
Lissajous [lees-ah-zhoo] figures. The double rod types of these objects are often used to demonstrate
chaotic motion, while a set of these in a row make up a Newton's cradle. One of these was used
to demonstrate the rotation of the Earth by Frenchman Leon Foucault. Derivations of the most
common formulas associated with these objects approximate that theta equals the sine of theta for
small oscillations. Name these devices whose period varies with the square root of its length and
which consist of a mass able to swing back and forth.
ANSWER: pendulums
The Melnikov-Arnold integral describes the motion of this system along its phase space separatrix, which
occurs when displacement equals pi. The Mathieu equation describes this system's acceleration as "negative
(g over L) sine theta." The double kind of these devices exhibit chaotic motion, and the speed of a bullet can
be determined using the ballistic type. The small angle approximation simplifies this system's equations of
motion, giving the period as "2 pi times the square root of L over g." For 10 points each, name this type of
simple harmonic oscillator consisting of a weighted bob on a string.
ANSWER: pendulum [prompt on simple harmonic oscillator before it is mentioned]
The velocity of a bullet can be found with a ballistic one of these devices. The period of one of these
equals two pi times the square root of L over g. For small angles, they approximate simple harmonic
motion. One of these devices was used to demonstrate the earth's (*) rotation by Jean Foucault. For 10
points, name this device that consists of a weight suspended on a string.
ANSWER: pendulum
A set of conditions developed by this physicist for two matrices determines whether they are
pseudoinverses. A notation of which this physicist is the second namesake simplifies Ricci's
notation by using two-component spinors and was developed with Ezra Newman. His proposal
that singularities except the Big Bang exist outside an event horizon is the cosmic censorship
hypothesis. This physicist proved that an initial cosmological singularity exists even in an
inhomogeneous universe, which was extended with another mathematician to show that some
form of geodesic incompleteness occurs in all black holes. Those results are a set of singularity
theorems developed with Stephen Hawking. For 10 points, name this British physicist who also
developed a namesake aperiodic tiling.
ANSWER: Roger Penrose
This scientist developed a tetrad-based notation for general relativity along with Ezra Newman. This
man is the second namesake of a mathematical entity which, for a matrix A, is denoted A-dagger.
That entity, a generalization of the inverse matrix, is a "pseudoinverse" named for this man and
Moore. In order to explain the isotropy of the universe as well as the origin of the "arrow of time,"
this scientist proposed the (*) Weyl curvature hypothesis. He also conjectured that there are no naked
singularities other than the Big Bang, which is known as the cosmic censorship hypothesis. He is also
known for his books on the relationship between physics and consciousness, including The Emperor's New
Mind. For 10 points, name this English physicist and mathematician who discovered two shapes which
aperiodically tile the plane, his namesake "tiles."
ANSWER: Roger Penrose
In chaos theory, the logistic map exhibits doubling of this property. In AC currents, capacitive
(kuh-pa-sit-ive) reactance is proportional to this, while inductive reactance (re-act-unce) is inversely
proportional to it. According to Kepler's third law, the square of this quantity is proportional to the cube of
the semi-major axis of the orbit. For a spring, this is given by the formula two pi times the square root of m
over k. For 10 points, give this term for the time it takes an oscillator to complete a cycle, the inverse of
frequency.
ANSWER: period
Plotting this value against the logarithm of its derivative creates a plot with a useful "death line" and
"graveyard" regions. A very small value of this quantity is possessed by PSR J1748-2446ad. This
quantity varies for certain objects via the as-yet-unexplained Blazhko effect. This value can be found
by finding the horizontal separation between (*) peaks on a light curve, and a fixed relationship between
this value and luminosity posited by Henrietta Leavitt makes Cepheid variables useful for calibrating
distance scales. If two bodies have a fixed ratio of this quantity, they are said to be in resonance. The
sidereal version of this quantity is the one that's usually reported. For 10 points, name this value for a pulsar
or variable star that gives the time it takes to undergo one rotation or oscillation.
ANSWER: period
A medium with this property can have Cerenkov radiation with zero minimum particle velocity, an
effect first observed in diffraction gratings by Smith and Purcell. The wavefunction of a particle in a
potential of this type can be decomposed in a plane wave and a function of this type according to (*)
Bloch's theorem. Quasicrystals have order but lack this property, though crystals possess it because they
have repeated translational symmetry. Functions with this property have some similarly-named value a for
which f of x plus a equals f of x, which is why such functions describe oscillating waves. For 10 points, give
this term, which refers to objects with repeating structures.
ANSWER: periodic [prompt on "symmetric" or "translationally symmetric"]
The curl of the magnetic field is approximately zero because this times the current density is small
and the energy density of a magnetic field is equal to one half B squared divided by this. (*) In a
vacuum, it divides the cross product of the electric and magnetic fields in the Poynting vector. The line
integral of the magnetic field equals the enclosed current times this according to the only one of Maxwell's
equations that uses it, Ampere's law. It is set to 4pi times ten to the minus seven, and multiplying it by the
speed of light squared and vacuum permittivity yields 1. For 10 points, name this quantity, symbolized mu
naught.
ANSWER: permeability of free space [or vacuum permeability, prompt on mu naught before mentioned; do not accept "permittivity"]
In plasmas above the highest resonant frequencies, this quantity is approximated by one minus the plasma
frequency over the frequency of propagation. The assumption of causality connects the real and imaginary
parts of this frequency-dependent quantity according to the Kramers-Kronig formalism, and it is related to
the molar polarizability by the Clausius-Mossotti equation. The displacement D in a medium is equal to this
quantity times the electric field, and for linear materials, the total energy stored in an electrostatic system is
equal to this times one-half the integral over all space of the square of the electric field. A capacitor can
store additional charge by inserting a dielectric to change this quantity. For 10 points, identify this quantity
symbolized epsilon which quantifies the effect of an electric field on a medium.
ANSWER: electric permittivity (accept relative permittivity or the dielectric constant or elecric susceptibility before "electric field")
Some mechanisms of this type were proposed in 1670 by John Wilkins, who advocated using
"Chymical Extractions", "Magnetical Virtues", and "the Natural Affection of Gravity" to produce
the desired effect. One theoretical example is the Brownian ratchet, which rotates a gear using
Brownian motion. Cox's timepiece was supposedly one of these, but it is powered by fluctuations in
atmospheric pressure. Another example, the (*) "overbalanced wheel", is said to work because there is
always more mass on one side of the wheel than the other. For 10 points, name this type of mechanism that
violates the first two laws of thermodynamics because it produces work without the input of energy.
ANSWER: Perpetual motion machine
Differences in this quantity are approximated in the Fraunhofer and Fresnel conditions to first and
second order respectively in the aperture coordinates. Noether's theorem states that global
invariance of this quantity gives rise to conservation of charge. In double slit diffraction, peaks and
troughs are caused by differences in (*) path length, which in turn creates differences in this quantity.
Coherence occurs when differences in this quantity are constant. Two waves are identical if they have the
same value for amplitude, frequency, and this quantity, which is a constant additive factor inside the
sinusoidal function. For 10 points, name this quantity which also names a velocity contrasted with group
velocity.
ANSWER: phase [accept gauge; accept path length before "conservation of charge," prompt afterwards]
The electromagnetic field has U(1) gauge symmetry which corresponds to a change in this value. This
value can be changed for a particle travelling around a solenoid in the Aharonov-Bohm effect; that is
called the "geometric" one of these. The type of velocity with this name is the angular frequency over
the wavenumber and is able to be greater than the speed of light. Every possible configuration of
position and momentum can be represented as points in this kind of (*) space, and in sinusoidal waves
it is denoted phi and indicates the angle at t equals zero. For 10 points, name this word that describes certain
"transitions" between different types of matter like liquid and gas.
ANSWER: phase (accept more specific things if they have phase in them)
Geological features on this moon consist of craters named after characters from the Jonathan Swift
novel Gulliver's Travels. In fact the only truly named ridge on this moon is the Kepler Dorsum. Its most
distinguishing geographical structure is the Stickney Crater. Discovered by Asaph Hall, who is also
responsible for discovery its brother moon, it is observed to have an irregular shape. Being the far closer to
its parent planet's surface than its brother moon, FTP, name this moon which orbits the red planet Mars
with Deimos.
ANSWER: Phobos
A Russian mission to this moon, "Grunt," had its launch delayed from October 2009 to 2011. The
Kaidun meteorite is thought to be a remnant of this moon. The largest crater on this moon is the
Stickney crater. Iosif Shklovksy claimed that this moon was of (*) artificial origin while attempting to
explain why it is slowly spiraling into the planet it orbits. For 10 points, name this moon that is both closer
to Mars and larger than its neighbor, Deimos.
ANSWER: Phobos
This object's low density led Iosif Shklovsky to erroneously suggested that it was hollow and created by
aliens. This body is home to the Gulliver's Travels-inspired Laputa Regio. Because this moon is composed
of loosely bound rubble, and its orbital radius is rapidly decaying, it will probably disintegrate within 50
million years. This is the nearest of the moons Mariner 9 photographed while orbiting a certain planet. This
body is home to a giant indentation named for the wife of its discoverer Asaph Hall; that is the Stickney
Crater. For 10 points, name this Martian moon, larger than Deimos, whose name derives from the Greek for
"fear."
ANSWER: Phobos
This object is thought to be made of carbonaceous chondrite like the Kaidun meteorite, which is
hypothesized to be a piece of it. Its orbit is faster than the rotation of its parent planet, since it lies below the
radius of synchronous orbit. Captured from the nearby asteroid belt, one of its prominent surface features is
named after its discoverer's wife, Stickney crater. When this satellite passes the Roche limit, it is expected
to be broken up by tidal forces and form a ring system around its planet. For 10 points, name this largest
moon of Mars, the partner of Deimos.
ANSWER: Phobos
These objects are dispersed away from a Fermi surface in Kohn Scattering. A third one of these particles is
created when two of them collide in the Umklapp process, which is distinguished from their normal process
by conservation of momentum. In florescence, their namesake sideband is shifted to a higher frequency
during absorption. Usually divided into thermal, optical, and acoustic types, Debye integrated over all of
their vibrational modes in order to derive his specific heat model. They obey the oscillatory conditions of
their Brillouin zones, and they are usually used to explain thermal and electrical conductivity. FTP, name
this quasi-particles, the quantized versions of lattice vibrations.
ANSWER: Phonons
At low temperatures, the mean free path of these particles is comparable with the dimensions of their
propagation medium in the de Haas-Biermasz effect. One mechanism for the collision of these particles
theorizes that the sum of the wave vectors of the original particles is equal to the final wave vector plus a
reciprocal primitive translation vector, the Umklapp process. These particles always have 3 acoustic modes
for a substance with greater than two atoms per unit cell. Their density of states is used to derive that the
heat capacity is proportional to T cubed in the Debye Model. They drive the pairing of electrons into
Cooper pairs in the BCS theory of superconductivity. For 10 points, name these bosons that propagate at the
speed of sound in a solid, described as quantized lattice vibrations.
ANSWER: phonons
Their wavevectors can be placed in Brillouin zones in reciprocal space, and their pseudomomentum is
defined up to placement in a Brillouin zone. In a gas of them, their chemical potential is zero, so their
thermal type can be created or destroyed by random fluctuations. Quantum mechanically, they can be
obtained by adding translational symmetry to the Hamiltonian, and the optical variety can interact with
infrared light. However, most of these are of the acoustic variety, and their propagation speed is equal to the
speed of sound in a solid. For 10 points, name these quantized vibrational modes in a crystal lattice that
notably interact with Cooper pairs in BCS theory.
ANSWER: phonons
Net momentum in not conserved in Umklapp processes in which these entities are annihilated. Their
dispersion and relaxation times are given by the Boltzmann transport equation and their N processes
are characterized by wavevectors located inside the first (*) Brillouin zone. They eliminate collisions
and scattering by mediating electron interactions in superconductors and their dispersion curves in ionic
solids consist of optical and acoustic branches. For 10 points, name this quantum of vibrational mechanical
energy in a crystal lattice.
ANSWER: phonons
It is employed by the new titanium based toothbrush called soladey, which combat plaque by neutralizing
the substance's protons. In one experiment involving it, a circular zinc plate is attached to a gold leaf
electroscope exposed to burning magnesium. In another experiment, the lengths of sparks generated by an
induction coil were found to have become smaller in darkness. In addition to the work of Wilhelm
Hallwachs and Heinrich Hertz, it is demonstrated in experiments where no detectable time lag is found, and
kinetic energy is seen to be independent of intensity. The cut-off frequency times Planck's constant is used
to calculate the minimum energy needed for an electron to escape the surface, the work function. FTP,
name this phenomenon where electrons are emitted from matter after the absorption of packets of
electromagnetic radiation, famously explained by Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
The cross-section of this effect is approximately proportional to the atomic number to the power of a
constant divided by the energy cubed, though this only applies for high energies. This effect is used in
a type of spectroscopy that gives the percent elemental composition of a sample by measuring binding
energies, and this effect was first observed by Heinrich Hertz, who noted the wavelength dependence of
the firing of a spark gap. The kinetic energy of a particle created by this effect is equal to the Planck
constant times the frequency, minus the work function. For Explained by Einstein, for 10 points, name this
effect in which light shining upon a metal surface liberates electrons.
ANSWER: Photoelectric effect
One quantity important in understanding this effect appears in the numerator of the exponential
of the Richardson-Dushman equation, and is equal to about one-half of the ionization energy of the
free atom. One can place a collecting plate next to a device undergoing this effect to find the stopping
potential. The maximum kinetic energy of a particle undergoing this effect does not depend on the
incident (*) intensity. The minimum energy needed for this effect to occur is equal to Planck's constant
multiplied by the threshold frequency, which is equal to the work function. For 10 points, identify this
effect discovered by Heinrich Hertz and studied by Albert Einstein, in which light liberates electrons from a
metal to create a current.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect [do NOT accept "photovoltaic effect" or other wrong answers]
In this effect, when the work function of the material is less than Planck's constant times the
frequency of the particle involved, the maximum kinetic energy is given by the difference between the
two. "Fermi's golden rule" can be used to calculate the probability of an atom ejecting a particle via
this effect, which was first observed by Heinrich Hertz. Demonstrating the wave-particle duality of light, for
10 points, name this effect studied by Einstein where electrons are emitted from matter hit by
electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
This phenomenon was first noticed by Heinrich Hertz, who used a coil with a spark gap, though an early
"voltaic" version of this phenomenon had been noted by Becquerel in 1839. Philipp Lenard noted this
phenomenon's apparent contradiction of a theory proposed by Maxwell. The resolution of that problem
posed by this effect saw the proposition of photons as quanta of light, which better explained the ejection of
electrons noticed in this effect. For 10 points, name this physical effect that sees electrons emitted from
matter that is struck by electromagnetic radiation, the explanation of which won Albert Einstein the 1921
Nobel Prize in physics.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
A magnetic analogue of this phenomenon has been recently discovered by Oliveira and Rand. Philipp
Lenard discovered that it can cause a sheet of zinc to gain a positive charge, and the minimum value
of a certain quantity in order for this phenomenon to occur can be found by dividing the work
function by Planck's constant. This phenomenon was first discovered when (*) ultraviolet light was
shined on a spark gap by Heinrich Hertz, and Einstein won a Nobel Prize by explaining that it is due to the
particle nature of light. For ten points, identify this effect in which objects emit electrons as they absorb
high-energy photons.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect (or Hertz effect before mentioned)
This phenomenon is used by an h-over-e apparatus, such as the PASCO AP-9368, which can be
used to experimentally determine Planck's constant. The probability of this effect is often given as
atomic number raised to the n over h nu to the third, where n is between three and five. By exactly
offsetting the maximum kinetic energy of this process, one can calculate the stopping potential. The
kinetic energy of particles emitted by this process is equal to Planck's constant times frequency
minus the difference in (*) energy level between the vacuum and their Fermi energy, which is the work
function. A 1905 Annus Mirabilis paper explaining this effect won Einstein his Physics Nobel. For 10
points, name this effect in which incident light frees electrons from a metal.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect [or photoemission]
The paper explaining this phenomenon begins with a section critical of the theory of blackbody
radiation, showing that an integral of energy with respect to volume equals infinity. That problem is
solved by assuming that energy "is discontinuously distributed in space." Some of the measurements
of this effect, which used to be associated with ultraviolet light, were made by Philipp Lenard, who
discovered that light intensity did not impact the amount of voltage required to stop rays produced
by light striking metal. Name this effect explained when the Planck hypothesis was applied by Albert
Einstein, leading to Einstein's Nobel Prize.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
This effect governed by the Stoletov's law was first observed in a spark gap between two brass conductors.
Lenard found that increased intensity has no effect on the maximum kinetic energy of the emitted particles,
and that it does not occur for red light. Discovered by Hertz in 1865, it was finally explained in terms of
photons by Albert Einstein, which won him the Nobel Prize in Physics. For 10 points, name this effect in
which shining light on a metal surface causes the emission of electrons.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
The probability of absorption via this effect is proportional to the cube of the atomic number and linearly
with the mass density. An early observation of this effect was due to Heinrich Hertz, who observed stronger
emissions from a spark gap in a dark box with a quartz lid compared to one with a glass lid. Robert
Millikan's experiments with this effect gave the Planck's constant within 0.5% accuracy. It only occurs when
the energy of the causative particles is greater than the work function of the target, and Albert Einstein won
the Nobel prize for his work on this effect. For 10 points, identify this effect that sees the emission of
charged particles from materials when high-frequency light is shone on them.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
This effect dominates in energy regimes under one mega-electron volt, while at higher energies Compton
scattering and pair production are likely to occur. It was first observed by Heinrich Hertz while working
with spark gaps. Mathematically, this effect is likely to occur when the threshold frequency of the
electromagnetic radiation times Planck's constant is equal to the work function, usually represented by a
lower case phi. For 10 points, name this effect where incident light on the surface of a metal releases
electrons.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
This effect causes the attenuation coefficient to sharply increase in the K edge. This effect is used to
measure molecular orbital energies in a type of spectroscopy that uses UV radiation as a source. This effect
is combined with secondary emission to detect UV, visible, and near IR radiation with great sensitivity in
vacuum tubes named for being a "multiplier" of this effect. The stopping voltage for this effect does not
depend on incident intensity. This effect requires a threshold kinetic energy to be met that is equivalent to
the work function. For 10 points, name this effect in which an incident photon results in the emission of an
electron from a metal surface, described by Einstein in a 1905 paper.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
Hallwach performed one early experiment that verified the existence of this phenomenon by exposing a zinc
plate to burning magnesium, and R.H. Fowler confirmed that this phenomenon can also occur in insulators.
Robert Millikan verified another scientist's explanation of Lenard's experiment on this phenomenon. The
extent to which this effect occurs is independent of the radiation's intensity, but directly related to its
frequency as first observed by Heinrich Hertz and explained by Albert Einstein. For 10 points, name this
effect characterized by exposure to electromagnetic radiation and by the emission of electrons from a metal
surface.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
Wilhelm Hallwach observed the change in the rate of charge leakage from a gold electroscope to expand on
initial observations of this effect. Important predictions about it were confirmed by Millikan in 1916, who
used it to accurately calculate Planck's constant and who showed that the energy of the emitted particles is
equivalent to the energy of the incident particles minus the work function of the metal. First observed by
Hertz, this is, for 10 points, what effect, whose elucidation earned Einstein the 1921 Physics Nobel, wherein
an incoming electromagnetic radiation causes a metal to emit an electron?
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
A form of spectroscopy utilizing X-rays and this effect is complementary to Auger spectroscopy and
is used to measure the binding energies of atoms. This effect is combined with secondary emission in a
PMT to enhance signal intensity in various forms of spectroscopy. The amount of electromotive
force required to prevent this effect from producing a net current is referred to as the stopping
potential. The maximum possible (*) kinetic energy attainable by the product of this effect is equal to
Planck's constant times the incident photon frequency minus the work function of the material. For 10
points, the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Albert Einstein for his explanation of what effect, in
which an electron is ejected from a material due to light shining on it?
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
The Duane-Hunt law describes an inverse form of this phenomenon produced by the bremsstrahlung. The
stopping potential is typically used in experimental measurements of this phenomenon. Millikan was able
to measure Planck's constant to within 0.5% precision in a series of experiments on this effect. The change
in energy of a certain particle due to it is independent of intensity of the incident radiation. It can only occur
when the work function is less than the product of Planck's constant and the frequency of the incident light.
For 10 points, name this effect in which photons eject electrons from a metal plate, whose explanation won
Einstein the 1905 Nobel Prize.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect [accept Hertz effect before mention]
This effect was first discovered in gaps between Ruhmkorff coils. Elster and Geitel extended the study
of this effect to amalgams and hydrides of alkali metals. Alexander Stoletov found a direct relationship
between the magnitude of this effect and incident intensity, while Philip von Lenard found that its
magnitude increased linearly with frequency above a threshold. This effect was discovered by Heinrich
Hertz and explained in a paper "On a heuristic viewpoint concerning the production and transformation of
light." For ten points, name this discharge of electrons when a metallic surface is exposed to light, explained
in one of three Annalen der Physik papers published in 1905 by Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
The cross section of this phenomenon is proportional to atomic number raised to the fifth. One way to
measure this phenomenon experimentally is to measure the stopping potential. This phenomenon is used for
the function of night-vision goggles. A plot of the energy of this phenomenon graphed against frequency has
an x-intercept at the threshold frequency, a y-intercept at the negative work function, and a slope of
Planck's constant. It was first demonstrated by Heinrich Hertz, and Einstein won a Nobel Prize for
explaining it. For 10 points, name this effect in which electrons are ejected from a metal when light is
shined on it.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
This phenomenon's namesake spectroscopy can be used to determine the binding energy of a
material. This effect experiences no detectable time lag due to ambient radiation. The work function
over Planck's constant equals the threshold frequency of this effect. The use of induction coils with
spark gaps bombarded by ultraviolet light allowed [*] Heinrich Hertz to discover this effect. According
to Lenard, the kinetic energy of the resulting particles is intensity-independent and varies with the
wavelength of the incident radiation in this effect. For 10 points, name this effect by which photons hitting
a surface cause emission of electrons, the explanation of which won Einstein his Nobel Prize.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect
The Duane-Hunt law can be used to calculate the maximum frequencies observed from an inverse form of
this effect. It was first seen in an experiment performed in a dark box, where the area between two brass
conductors formed a spark gap, but the same could not be said for glass or quartz when UV light was shone
on them. This effect is only observed in materials whose work function is less than the energy of incident
particles, and the difference in those quantities gives the kinetic energy of particles emitted. Sometimes
named for its discoverer Heinrich Hertz, for 10 points, name this effect in which photons striking a metal
result in an emission of electrons.
ANSWER: photoelectric effect [or Hertz effect before mentioned]
These particles undergo a decrease in energy in the Raman effect and the Compton effect, in contrast to
the elastic interaction they undergo in Rayleigh scattering. The energy of one of these particles is given by
the product of Planck's constant and its frequency, and Thomas Young fired these particles at a double slit
in an experiment demonstrating their wave nature. For 10 points, name these particles that comprise
electromagnetic radiation such as visible light.
ANSWER: photons
In order for both energy and momentum to be conserved, a nucleus is usually involved when these particles
decay into an electron and positron. Einstein's coefficients determine when these particles are emitted in
systems which usually have undergone population inversion. The energy of these particles is sometimes
sufficient to exceed a material's work function, and is proportional to their momentum. These particles were
proven to diffract in Young's double-slit experiment, and their existence explains the photoelectric effect.
For 10 points, identify these massless particles which move at the speed of light.
ANSWER: photons
The tendency of these particles to follow super-Poisson statistics rather than Poisson statistics
manifests in their namesake bunching. QED predicts that all interactions between charged particles
are due to exchange of these. These particles decoupled from baryonic matter during the
recombination era, and their bouncing off of the surface of last scattering created the CMB. These
particles are emitted when charged particles change (*) trajectory in brehmsstralung. They decrease in
energy when interacting with matter in Compton scattering, and they interfere with each other when
passing through an aperture, which shows their dual nature. For 10 points, name this spin-1 massless gauge
boson, the carrier of the electromagnetic force and a particle of light.
ANSWER: photon
Einstein's A and B coefficients occur in a law which describes the absorption rate of one of these particles
during energy transitions. The Stark-Einstein law states that in certain reactions every molecule reacts with
exactly one of these, while pair production usually creates an elementary particle and its antiparticle from
one of these. Electron-position annihilation results in two of these. Their energy is equal to Planck's
constant times their frequency, and they may eject electrons upon hitting metals in an effect first studied by
Hertz. For ten points, name these elementary particles, the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons (Accept gamma rays.)
One branch of physics named for two of these entities describes single and double resolved processes
which result in the formation of a vector meson. Their differential cross section is proportional to the
square of the fine structure constant, and is given by the Klein-Nishina formula. Pair production
describes their interaction with a (*) nucleus, creating a positron and an electron. The wavelength of one
of these particles decreases in an effect named for the winner of the 1927 Nobel Prize in Physics, and is
caused by their collision with electrons. For 10 points, identify these particles whose energy is decreased in
Compton scattering, the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons [accept gamma rays]
These particles are the primary application of the Gupta-Bleuler method. Their tunneling is
utilized in NSOM devices. They are produced when holes and electrons combine in a device using p
and n layers of a material with a direct band gap. They are created in stimulated emission. The
energy of one of these is (*) Planck's constant times the frequency. The virtual form of these particles
mediate the electromagnetic force. For 10 points, name these particles that make up light.
ANSWER: photon
These particles can undergo an inelastic scattering process described by the Klein-Nishina formula; that
process consists of them losing energy when they collide with matter due to Compton Scattering. When one
of these particles imparts enough energy to an electron for it to exceed the work function, that electron may
be emitted from the surface of a metal in an effect described in a 1905 Einstein paper. For 10 points, name
these particles which are responsible for the photoelectric effect and which are the carriers of all
electromagnetic radiation, such as x-rays and light.
ANSWER: photons
Arthur Compton first measured the momentum of this particle in the experiment which discovered the
Compton Effect. The discovery of how an impact with these particles causes matter to emit electrons won
Albert Einstein his only Nobel Prize. These particles were fired at at a "double slit" in Young's experiment,
which found an interference pattern supporting wave-particle duality. For 10 points, name these particles
representing quanta of light.
ANSWER: photon
Crystals with a periodically varying dielectric constant can be engineered to have a band gap
restricting the propagation of these particles. The self-force caused by a particle emitting one of these
particles is given by the Abraham-Lorentz formula. Neutral pions primarily decay into two of these
particles. In quantum electrodynamics, interactions mediated by the electromagnetic force are
accompanied with the exchange of a virtual one of these particles, since these particles are the (*)
gauge boson of the electromagnetic force. These particles lose energy during Compton scattering. The
energy of one of these particles equals Planck's constant times its frequency. For 10 points, name these
massless particles which are the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons [accept "photonic crystals," "virtual photons," etc.]
The production of these particles instead of waves explains why bremsstrahlung produces x-rays with a
maximum frequency. These particles collide with matter, such as electrons, to produce Compton scattering.
Stimulated emission is the result of one of these particles striking an excited atom and producing another
one of them as coherent radiation. Einstein explained an effect in which these particles strike a metal, which
then gives off electrons. For 10 points, name these particles, the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons
In 2014, University of Queensland researchers used two of these particles to simulate time travel.
Blackbody radiation can be explained using a gas made up of these particles. Arthur Compton verified
that these particles have momentum, and these particles lose energy during Compton scattering.
Albert Einstein hypothesized the existence of these particles to explain electron emission. These
particles are represented by the letter gamma because they make up gamma rays, and they are also
the components of microwaves and X-rays. Name these carriers of the electromagnetic force, the
quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons
The theory of QED applies to charged particles exchanging these spin-1 bosons. One of these particles
collides with an electron and loses energy in Compton scattering. The energy of these particles is equal to
their frequency times the Planck constant, and they exhibit both particle-like and wave-like behavior. For
10 points, name these particles, the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons
The interaction of dust and these particles results in Poynting-Robertson drag. A neutral pion decays into
two of these particles, which are their own antiparticles. The increase in wavelength of these particles when
they collide with electrons is the Compton effect. These particles result from electron-positron annihilation,
and these bosons can also be created by stimulated emission. The energy of these particles equals the
product of frequency and Planck's constant. For 10 points, name these particles that comprise light and
other forms of electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: photons
In the case of ultrarelativistic interacting particles, the Weizsacker-Williams method gives a
simplifying approximation of one of the interacting particles as an equivalent one of these particles.
The theory of these particles extends Yukawa theory by using these particles as internal propagators
instead of a scalar field. Particles coupled to an external field may drop to a (*) lower energy level and
give off one or more of these particles in stimulated emission. The force mediated by these particles falls off
as one over r squared, allowing much longer interactions than other gauge bosons. For 10 points, name
these gauge bosons which mediate the electromagnetic force and are the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photon
QED explains interactions between charged particles as exchange of these particles. The decrease in energy
of these particles after a collision is known as the Compton Effect. This particle is its own antiparticle
because it has no electric charge. The work of Max Planck was used by Einstein to explain the
photoelectric effect by theorizing the existence of these particles, and the Standard Model identifies them as
the gauge bosons which carry the electromagnetic force. FTP, name these elementary particles which, in
simple terms, compose light rays.
ANSWER: Photons
The ratio of the rate of emission of these particles to Auger ionization is proportional to the third power
of atomic number. Dust particles lose momentum after interaction with these particles in
Poynting-Robertson drag. Pair production generates an electron and positron from one of these particles.
One cross-section for scattering of these particles by charges is given by eight pi over three times the
square of the classical particle radius, that being the Thompson cross-section; another such cross-section is
the Klein-Nishina formula. The energy of one of these is equal to Planck's constant times its frequency. For
10 points, name these particles that carry the electromagnetic force and travel at the speed of light because
they are the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons
These particles are produced by annihilation of electron-positron pairs at low energies, and this particle
transfers energy to electrons in an elastic collision in an effect named for Compton. Einstein used the
existence of this particle to explain an effect discovered by Hertz. This particle is the mediator of the
electromagnetic interaction, and its energy is directly proportional to its frequency. The speed of this
particle in a vacuum is denoted c and is approximately 3.00 x 10^8 ["3.00 times 10 to the 8th"] meters per
second. For 10 points, name this particle, the quantum of light.
ANSWER: photons
Serge Haroche has recently used an electromagnetic cavity to trap these particles, and one of these items
escapes in the Einstein's box thought experiment. The existence of the momentum of these particles was
demonstrated by Arthur Compton, and these particles are often created by low-energy particle-antiparticle
annihilation. These elementary particles mediate the electromagnetic force and are used to explain the
photoelectric effect. Name these objects used to explain the particle nature of light.
ANSWER: photons [prompt x-ray(s)]
The Bloch-Floquet theorem is applicable to certain types of crystals which can control the flow of
these particles. Gamma is used to represent one of these on a Feynman diagram. The term Einstein is
used to refer to a mole of them, and the absorption of this gauge boson of electromagnetism must be
accompanied by a change of plus or minus 1 in the L quantum number and no change in the spin
quantum number. Possessing zero rest mass, for 10 points, identify these particles which can be
described as quantized units of light.
ANSWER: photon [accept: electron before "Einstein"]
Inelastic scattering of these particles by a free charged particle is known as Compton scattering.
An electron and positron are created from these particles in pair production. The momentum of this
particle is the quotient of Planck's constant and wavelength. The energy of this particle can be
expressed as the product of Planck's constant and frequency, and it (*) mediates the electromagnetic
force. For 10 points, identify this massless particle which is the quantum of light.
ANSWER: photons
These particles interact with a strong electric field to produce an electron and a positron in pair
production, and they're represented on a Feynman diagram using gamma. A high-frequency one of these
loses energy in Compton scattering. Their energy is equal to Planck's constant times frequency, and they
mediate the electromagnetic force. For 10 points, identify these particles that are the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photon
When passing through turbid materials, this particle can retain linear motion and is said to be "ballistic." In
a system with two of these particles, mass can be created at high energies since these particle can become a
fermion-antifermion pair. This massless particle has an energy inversely proportional to its wavelength.
These particles are bombarded at a metal and electrons are emitted in an effect explained by Einstein. For
10 points, name this particle that exhibits wave-like behavior and is the basic unit of all electromagnetic
radiation, including light.
ANSWER: photons
One of these objects can couple with a quasiparticle of plasma oscillation known as a plasmon to form a
polariton. Low-energy annihilation produces at least two of these particles, which are represented by wavy
lines in Feynman diagrams. The momenta of these particles may be calculated by multiplying the reduced
Planck constant by the wave vector. Besides the gluon, this boson is the only massless particle in the
Standard Model, and it mediates the electromagnetic force. This particle's speed in a vacuum, c, cannot be
exceeded by any matter. For 10 points, name this elementary particle, the quantum of light.
ANSWER: photons [prompt on "gamma"]
One of these particles produces an electron and a positron in pair production. One of them is
spontaneously emitted when a nucleus in an excited state transitions to a ground state. These particles were
emitted in Thomas Young's double-slit experiment, which demonstrated wave-particle duality. They
mediate the electromagnetic interaction. For 10 points, name these particles which make up light.
ANSWER: photons
The production of these particles instead of waves explains why bremsstrahlung produces x-rays with a
maximum frequency. These particles collide with matter, such as electrons, to produce Compton scattering.
Stimulated emission is the result of one of these particles striking an excited atom and producing another
one of them as coherent radiation. Einstein explained an effect in which these particles strike a metal, which
then gives off electrons. For 10 points, name these particles, the quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons
The fundamental interaction mediated by this particle is described by the U(1) symmetry group.
These particles form bosonic quasiparticles called polaritons when they interact with dipole
excitations. Neutral pions mostly decay into two of these particles, whose scattering from electrons
has a cross section given by the (*) Klein-Nishina formula. Interactions of two of these particles at high
energies can create electrons and positrons through pair production, and these particles are produced in
matter-antimatter annihilations. These particles are the gauge bosons of electromagnetism, have spin zero,
and are massless. For 10 points, identify these particles, the quantized units of light.
ANSWER: photon
The fact that these entities are predicted to have greater-than-unity transmission probability at an infinite
potential barrier is the original form of the Klein paradox. That paradox can be resolved in part by noting
that, above a cutoff energy, these particles will react with a strong electric field to produce an electron and
positron, a phenomenon known as pair production. Spontaneous emission of one of these particles occurs
when an electron drops from a higher to a lower energy state, and the energy of one of these particles is
given by Planck's constant times the speed of light over wavelength. For 10 points, name these particles, the
quanta of light.
ANSWER: photons [accept gamma rays; prompt on spin-0 particles]
The momentum of this particle is equal to h-bar times the wave vector. This particle is the only massless
gauge boson involved in the electroweak interaction. These particles undergo Compton scattering, and one
of these particles generates an electron and a positron in pair production. It is the carrier of the
electromagnetic force, and the energy of this particle is equal to Planck's constant times frequency. For 10
points, identify these particles, the quantized units of light.
ANSWER: photons
This particle is the namesake a sphere whose radius is three-halves times the Schwarzschild radius. The
effect of gravity on these particles was indicated by the Pound-Rebka experiment. The frequency of these
particles is changed in Raman Scattering, and their momentum changes in Compton scattering. The
interaction of these particles with a strong electric field can result in the production of an electron and
positron in pair production. These particles are created in stimulated emission. For 10 points, name these
particles of electromagnetic radiation that make up light.
ANSWER: photons
Virtual versions of these particles are impacted by uncharged plates in the Casimir effect. The leading
theory behind Hawking radiation is based on the creations of pairs of these particles, one of which escapes.
These particles lose energy to electrons in the Compton effect and the photoelectric effect. The fact that
these particles are massless explains the infinite range of the electromagnetic force, which these carry.
Name these light quanta.
ANSWER: photons (prompt on "x-ray" or "gamma ray")
A formula for the expected value for the number of these at a given pressure and temperature invokes
a factor of zeta of three. A Bose gas was first formulated to consist of these, which, when put in a box,
would have energy equal to h omega times the number of these. De Broglie extended a property
commonly associated with them to any particle with momentum. For 10 points, gamma radiation
consists of high energy ones of these massless particles, the bosons of the electromagnetic force and
quantization of light.
ANSWER: photons
Devices making use of this behavior can often be modeled as Butterworth-van Dyke equivalent circuits.
Temperature-dependent resonant frequencies are a hallmark of resonators made out of materials with this
property. It has direct and converse forms, the latter of which Langevin used in his sonar devices and the
former of which is used in the quartz crystal microbalance. All ferroelectric materials have both
pyroelectricity and this property. Crystals with this property, such as Rochelle salts, necessarily lack a
center of symmetry. Discovered by Pierre and Jacques Curie, for 10 points, name this property in which
voltage is generated by mechanical stress on a crystal.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity [or piezoelectric effect]
The fuses in some rocket propelled grenades make use of this effect, while sensors utilizing it can be used to
measure vibrations. Like Ferromagnetism, dipoles in materials exhibiting this effect are often aligned in
Weiss domains. One of the most common uses of it is in cigarette lighters where a material with this
property is struck by a spring-loaded hammer. The converse of this effect, electrostriction, allows bones to
slightly change their structure in the presence of an electric field. Discovered by Jacques and Pierre Curie in
1880, FTP, is this effect which is most prominently displayed in compounds like barium titanate, berlinite,
Rochelle salts, and quartz.
ANSWER: piezoelectric effect or piezoelectricity
Woldemar Voigt developed a set of tensor equations to describe the linear behavior of materials exhibiting
this effect, and a rank-3 tensor with 18 coefficients is used to describe materials with this property. Titanate
salts of barium and lead are used in microphones because they exhibit this property, and Langevin
developed a submarine detector that relied on this effect. This effect occurs in materials lacking a centre of
symmetry and has an inverse effect called electrostriction. It was first observed by the Curie brothers in
their studies of Rochelle salts. For 10 points identify this effect which sees the production of current in
response to the application of a mechanical stress.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity [accept piezoelectric effect]
A magnetic analogue of this effect involving ferromagnetic materials is called magnetostriction. During
World War II, discovery of ferroelectrics sparked the creation of man-made ceramics exhibiting this effect
such as barium titanate and lead zirconate titanate, which is used in medical imaging. Hooke's law may be
used to generate the four coefficients of this effect, which is preceded in materials by alignment of electric
dipoles into Weiss domains. Notable for its use in the development of the sonar, for 10 points, name this
effect where mechanical strain on a crystal produces a voltage.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity effect
AC transformers that use acoustic coupling utilize the inverse of this effect to cause vibration at a
resonant frequency. Materials that are subject to this effect, such as barium titanate, lack a center of
symmetry. Scanning electron microscopes utilize the inverse of this effect to position a (*) needle-like
probe, while cigarette lighters use it to generate voltages high enough to induce sparks. This effect is
induced by the rearrangement of electric dipole moments, and it was discovered by Pierre and Jacques
Curie. For ten points, name this effect, the induced electric current caused by mechanical stress to a crystal.
ANSWER: Piezoelectricity or Piezoelectric effect
Mayer and Atzrodt have developed models to investigate the use of this property in actuators, and wafers
possessing this property are used to control scanning microscopes in the nanometer range. Lead zirconate
titanate is the standard medical imaging material which uses it, and PVDF is one of the few polymers to
display it. It is exhibited by ceramics like barium tantalite and lithium niobate, and its converse is
eletrostriction. First discovered in Rochelle salts and quarts by Pierre and Jacques Curie, FTP, identify this
ability of certain materials to produce an electric potential in response to applied stress.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity (accept equivalents like "piezoelectric effect")
Binnig and Smith employed materials of this type to construct the tube scanner, which came to be
predominantly used in scanning electron microscopes after its invention. The namesake strain constants of
these materials are given by the derivatives of the strain tensor with respect to components of the electric
field. Examples of these materials include the lead zirconate-lead titanate system and the PVF2 system,
which is used in ultrasonic transducers. These materials all lack inversion centers in which coupling
between the strain and their namesake tensors induces an electric polarization. While some of these
materials are a subset of ferroelectrics, others like quartz are not. For 10 points, identify these materials
which generate a voltage when compressed by mechanical stresses, and vice versa.
ANSWER: piezoelectrics [accept all word forms, e.g. piezoelectricity]
This property can be observed in collagen because dipoles within it form a biological electret. This
phenomenon is observed in twenty of the twenty-one non-centrosymmetric crystal classes. It is described
by a set of four coefficients, two for its direct form and two for its converse form. One material with this
property provides the balancing force to control height in an atomic force microscope. Another material
with this property, barium titanate, is used in microphones. The mathematical description of this
phenomenon relates a material's electric displacement to a quantity calculated by Hooke's law. For 10
points, name this phenomenon wherein a solid acquires a voltage in response to strain.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity
Along with dielectric constant, this property is diminished in the pyrochlore phase of a material. Tiersten
developed a system of energy balances as an IEEE model for their activity. This behavior can be explained
by coupling the equation setting displacement equal to permittivity times electric field with Hooke's law,
then looking at the tensor elements. Materials with a center of symmetry cannot undergo this effect, which
can be explained by noting that a change in the dipole configuration or density in a bulk material is
accompanied by a change in the surface charge. For 10 points, name this property discovered in Rochelle
salts by Pierre and Jacques Curie, found in materials like quartz in which an electric response results from
stress or strain on a material.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity
This effect is present in animal bones, possibly to regulate growth. It is analogous to the cause of hum in
transformers, magnetostriction, while in medical imaging, the most common material used for this effect is
lead zirconate titanate. Carbon nanotubes also respond to this effect, for which an especially high quality
factor is possessed by quartz. This phenomenon's converse consists of an applied field causing a crystal's
dimensions to change. Discovered by the Curie brothers, identify this effect wherein stress applied to a
crystal creates an electric potential difference.
ANSWER: piezoelectric (pee-AY-zoh-"electric") effect [or piezoelectricity]
The Berlincourt meter measures this effect's namesake coefficient, symbolized D33, which is used in the
constitutive equations that describe both its direct and converse varieties. An analogue of this phenomenon
caused by applying a magnetic field to a ferromagnetic material is known as magnetostriction. Barium
titanate and Rochelle salts can exhibit this effect because they lack a center of symmetry, and this
phenomenon is also observed in crystals that accumulate charge due to deformation, like quartz. For 10
points, name this effect in which an applied mechanical strain generates voltage in a material.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity
The most important of the g and d constants for these materials are subscripted one five, three one,
and three three; the latter d constant is negative for the polymer PVDF. Some of these materials can
have ideal properties around the phase transition between the tetragonal and the rhombohedral
phases, the morphotropic phase boundary. Important characteristics of these materials include the
coupling factor k squared and the mechanical quality factor big Q sub m. Barium titanate and PZT are
commonly used types of these materials. These materials transition to dielectric above the Curie
temperature because they can no longer sustain polarization. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon
exhibited by quartz, in which mechanical stress applied to a material generates an electric potential.
ANSWER: piezoelectric materials [or ferroelectric materials; or word forms]
AC transformers that use acoustic coupling utilize the inverse of this effect to cause vibration at a
resonant frequency. Materials that are subject to this effect, such as barium titanate, lack a center of
symmetry. Scanning electron microscopes utilize the inverse of this effect to position a (*) needle-like
probe, while cigarette lighters use it to generate voltages high enough to induce sparks. This effect is
induced by the rearrangement of electric dipole moments, and it was discovered by Pierre and Jacques
Curie. For ten points, name this effect, the induced electric current caused by mechanical stress to a crystal.
ANSWER: Piezoelectricity or Piezoelectric effect
One equation used to study the anisotropy in this process is called Green's function. This process and its
converse can be observed in outer hair cells, and it is implemented in Scanning Tunneling microscopes.
Materials exhibiting this effect also exhibit the Debye-Sears effect where they establish acoustic waves
when vibrated at fixed frequencies if placed in liquid. Poling is necessary to induce this effect in ceramic
materials, and Rochelle salts are exhibit this effect upon compression, which was discovered by Pierre and
Paul-Jacques Curie. For ten points, name this effect the generation of electric potential in response to an
applied mechanical strain.
ANSWER: piezoelectricity (or piezoelectric effect)
A baryon state that decays into a delta baryon and one of these, or one or two nucleons and one of
these, is the Roper resonance. The energy of cosmic rays is bounded at around five times ten to the
nineteen eV because collisions with CMB photons would produce these particles at higher energies. These
particles are the standard triplet representation of SU(2) isospin symmetry. One type of these usually decays
into a muon and its neutrino, and the other usually forms two photons or can form a photon, electron, and
positron in Dalitz decay. Its charged versions are the up antidown and the down antiup. For 10 points, name
these first-generation mesons, the lightest.
ANSWER: pions
This is the lightest particle to be an eigenstate of the G-parity operator but not the charge
conjugation operator. The decay of the phi meson into three of these particles is suppressed since the
Feynman diagram can be cut in two while cutting only internal gluon lines according to the OZI rule.
Since the kaon can decay into either two or three of these particles, the kaon was originally thought
to be two particles: the tau and the theta. The primary decay mode for the (*) neutral version of this
particle is into two photons, while charged versions will decay into a muon and a muon neutrino. The
exchange of one of these particles between two nucleons was predicted by Hideki Yukawa to mediate the
strong force. For 10 points, and up or down quark and an up or down antiquark compose what lightest
meson?
ANSWER: pion [or pi meson, accept more specific answers like pi+ or pi- or pi0]
Early craft in this program were designated Thor-Able and Atlas-Able. Other craft in this progam
established a so-called "weather network" in space, which measured cosmic rays and the interplanetary
magnetic field. The fourth probe in this program was the first vehicle to make a successful Earth-Moon
trajectory, while the sixth probe was the first to analyze the Sun's corona and is still NASA's oldest
functioning spacecraft. This program's namesake anomaly concerns the unexpected slowing of distant
spacecraft, and its notable achievements include traversing the Asteroid Belt and proving that most gaps in
Saturn's rings are not empty. Famous for carrying gold plaques intended to be viewed by extraterrestrials on
its spacecraft 10 and 11, name this program that launched the first probes to photograph the outer solar
system.
ANSWER: Pioneer
While trying to make light-bulbs glow brighter, this man corrected the Rayleigh-Jeans law, and, in
doing so, solved the problem of the ultraviolet catastrophe. His work with black-bodies also led him
to his (*) 1918 Nobel Prize winning conclusion, that energy could be released only in multiples of a certain
constant. For ten points, name this German physicist, the founder of quantum theory, whose namesake
constant is symbolized "h".
ANSWER: Max Planck
This man sometimes names the earliest epoch, when quantum gravitational effects were significant. A
2009 mission attempting to map the CMB was named for this man. This man also names a
hypothetical, subatomic black hole whose Compton wavelength is equal to its Schwarzchild radius.
The Langevin equation, a stochastic differential equation, is used with the Chapman-Kolmogorov
identity to derive a partial differential equation describing the time evolution of the probability (*)
density function that is named after Fokker and this man. This man's law is approximated at low frequencies
by the Rayleigh-Jeans law and accurately describes the intensity radiated by a black body. To solve the
ultraviolet catastrophe, he posited that radiation has discrete allowed energies or quanta given by n times v
times his namesake constant. For 10 points, name this German physicist.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This scientist gives his name to a network of nearly 80 research institutes in his home country, whose
members include Nobel laureates Hartmut Michel and Klaus von Klitzing. His namesake unit system,
containing a length unit approximately equal to one point six one six times ten to the negative thirty-five
meters, normalizes the gravitational constant, Boltzmann's constant, and the speed of light to 1. His
namesake law relates the spectral properties of blackbody radiation to wavelength and temperature. For 10
points, name this recipient of the 1918 Nobel Prize in Physics, a German theoretical physicist whose
namesake constant is denoted h.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This man names a period of time in the history of the universe, during which the four fundamental forces
were unified, that period lasted for an amount of time that is one unit in his system of natural called "God's
units." This man's introduction of the "action quantum" in his study of heat theory led him to formulate an
eponymous law that reduces to Rayleigh-Jeans Law at long wavelengths. That law of blackbody radiation
helped to resolve the "ultraviolet catastrophe" and led to the development of quantum theory. For 10 points,
name this scientist, whose constant has value 6.626*10^-34 joule-seconds and is symbolized by the letter h.
ANSWER: Max (Karl Ernst Ludwig) Planck
One law named for this man corrected for the fact that classical models of black bodies predict infinite
energy at short wavelengths. The de Broglie wavelength is equal to this man's constant divided by linear
momentum. He posited that electromagnetic energy could only be transmitted in multiplies of the
frequency times his namesake constant, symbolized h. For 10 points, name this German physicist whose
constant is equal to approximately 6.62 times 10 to the minus 34 Joule-seconds.
ANSWER: Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck
The Rydberg (RID-berg) constant is inversely proportional to this man's namesake constant. This man
was the first prominent physicist to endorse Einstein's theory of special relativity. He incidentally solved
the ultraviolet catastrophe by postulating that the emission of radiation from a blackbody was quantized.
When this man's namesake constant is divided by 2 pi it is called "reduced" and drawn with a bar through
it. For 10 points, name this physicist whose namesake constant is equal to 6.626 times 10 to the -34.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This man names an equation describing stochastic processes along with Adriaan Fokker. The nonrenormalizability 
of gravity becomes problematic at his namesake energy scale. He discovered a law that improves on Wien's 
approximation for low frequencies and avoids the ultraviolet catastrophe predicted by the Rayleigh-Jeans law. 
In addition to his law of black body radiation, he names a system of units based on fundamental constants. 
He posited that "E equals n times h nu," implying that energy is quantized. Known for a namesake constant 
equal to 2 pi times h-bar, for 10 points, name this German pioneer of quantum theory.
ANSWER: Max Planck
A constant named for this scientist is divided by mass times the speed of light in calculating the
Compton wavelength. This man names a law which avoids the UV catastrophe predicted by the
Rayleigh-Jeans law; that law yields an expression for the energy density for a black body. This physicist
also suggested that energy comes in the form of discrete packets, or quanta. For 10 points, identify this
German physicist whose namesake constant is symbolized h.
ANSWER: Max Planck
One unit scale named after this scientist sets values such as the gravitational [gra-vuh-TAY-shu-nul]
constant and speed of light equal to one, which ends up giving a length unit that is ten to the negative thirty-
fifth meters. A postulate that he considered to be a mathematical trick was used by Einstein to explain the
photoelectric effect. That postulate was used to justify why the ultraviolet catastrophe did not happen and
describe blackbody radiation. Name this German scientist whose constant, which gives the ratio of energy
to frequency, is often represented by a lower case h.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This man's namesake hypothetical particle is a small black hole whose Compton wavelength equals its
Schwarzschild radius. He solved the problem of ultraviolet catastrophe present in the Rayleigh-Jeans Law,
by developing his namesake law, which describes electromagnetic radiation of a blackbody for all
wavelengths. His constant appears in expressions for reaction rate and activation energy in the Eyring and
Arrhenius equations, and is defined as a photon's energy divided by its frequency. Other quantities named
after him include his namesake length, mass, and time. For 10 points, name this German physicist who
discovered the quantization of energy.
ANSWER: Max Planck
The unit of time after the big bang at which gravity separated from the other forces is named for this
man, and a law that is approximated by the Rayleigh-Jeans law and that describes blackbody radiation is
also named for him. A constant named after this man is used as the lower bound of error in the Heisenberg
Uncertainty Principle and is typically stated in Joules times seconds. For 10 points, name this physicist who
himself names a physical constant denoted h.
ANSWER: Max Planck
He is credited with deriving Wien's Law from a number of assumptions about the entropy of an ideal
oscillator, thereby adding his name to it. He initially rejected Einstein's explanation of the
photoelectric effect, feeling that wave theory would soon render the budding alternative for which he is
most famous unnecessary. Most famous for his work with Kirchhoff's Black Body Radiation problem, he is,
FTP, what physicist credited with discovering that the energy of a body can only be a multiple of his
namesake constant, the first physicist to propose quantum theory?
ANSWER: Max Planck
An equation named for this man and Nernst describes the flux of ions in the presence of both concentration
and electric potential gradients. An equation sometimes named for Kolmogorov that describes the time
evolution of the probability distribution of particle position, is sometimes named for this man and Fokker.
With Kelvin, he names a formulation of the Second Law of Thermodynamics, while his namesake law
relates the energy density of black body radiation to the inverse of wavelength to the fifth power. For 10
points, identify this physicist who suggested the quantization of energy in terms of his namesake constant,
symbolized h.
ANSWER: Max Planck
The probability distribution for the position of a particle in Brownian motion changes over time
according to the Kolmogorov forward equation, often named for Fokker and this man. The
observation that you can't trace Hawking radiation all the way back to the event horizon is called his
"trans" problem. A function with a cubic term in the numerator and an exponential in the
denominator, which at high frequencies reduces to the Wien approximation, describes the intensity of
radiation at a given frequency and bears his name. For 10 points, the energy of a wave divided by its
wavelength gives a constant represented by h, named for which German physicist?
ANSWER: Max Planck [or Karl Ernst Ludwig Marx Planck; prompt on Kolmogorov forward equation until mentioned; accept Fokker or Fokker-Planck until mentioned]
This scientist lends his name to a theory of dilute colloidal solutions. Vacuum fluctuations at a
length scale named for him result in quantum foam. He sought to overcome the deficiencies of the
Rayleigh-Jeans law and Wien's law to develop a universal law governing the (*) quantized emission of
radiation from a perfect emitter. For 10 points, name this individual who developed a law relating
blackbody radiation to temperature, and whose namesake constant, symbolized h, relates the energy of
a photon to its frequency.
ANSWER: Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck
His namesake particle is defined as a micro-black hole with a Compton length equal to its
Schwarzschild radius, and his namesake law holds that electromagnetic energy can only be emitted in
integer amounts proportional to the frequency, correcting the Rayleigh-Jeans law and disproving the
[*] ultraviolet catastrophe. He studied black bodies and proposed discrete packets called quanta. For 10
points, name this scientist with namesake "length" and "time", and whose constant is approximately equal to
6.6 times 10 to the -34 Joules seconds, and is symbolized lower-case h.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This scientist's namesake "epoch" is the first "10 to the minus 43" seconds of the universe's life, during
which quantum gravity was significant. He also names a system of maximally natural units. One quantity
named for this man is the quantum of action. That quantity also appears in a law named for this man, which
correctly described the blackbody spectrum and solved the "ultraviolet catastrophe". That same quantity is
about "6.6 times 10 to the minus 34 Joule-seconds", and is the constant of proportionality relating the
energy of a photon to its frequency, and is denoted by the letter h. For 10 points, name this founder of
quantum theory.
ANSWER: Max (Karl Ernst Ludwig) Planck [accept Paul (Adrien Maurice) Dirac until "frequency" is read]
This man resolved the "ultraviolet catastrophe" by introducing his namesake law of radiation, which
describes the electromagnetic radiation of all wavelengths at any temperature. In a hydrogen atom, angular
momentum is quantized in units of the reduced form of his constant. In quantum mechanics, his law
describes the direct relationship between a photon's energy and its frequency. For 10 points, name this
scientist whose eponymous constant is symbolized with a lower-case h.
ANSWER: Max Planck
The Kolmogorov forward equation is equivalent to a probability density function formulated by this man
and Adriaan Fokker. This man extended Wien's law to low frequencies and disproved a prediction of the
Rayleigh-Jeans law. In addition to resolving the ultraviolet catastrophe, this man created a law that raises
wavelength to the negative fifth power, his namesake law of radiation, which finds the energy of a
blackbody. His constant multiplied by frequency yields the energy of a photon and has a reduced form of h
over two pi. For 10 points, name this German recipient of the 1918 Nobel Prize in Physics who developed
quantum theory.
ANSWER: Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck
In addition to a Dutchman, this scientist names an equation for the probability density function of Brownian
motion. The successor of the WMAP is a spacecraft named for this man, who also names the time period
preceding the grand unification epoch. This man resolved the ultraviolet catastrophe by developing the
concept of energy quantization. The energy of a photon is equal to his namesake constant times frequency.
FTP name this physicist whose namesake constant is symbolized by a lowercase h, and is equal to 6.626
times 10 to the -34 joule seconds.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This scientist names a period of time that precedes cosmic inflation, when gravity had not separated from
the other three fundamental forces. This scientist improved upon Wien's (VEENZ) law and the
Stefan-Boltzmann law in formulating a better equation to describe blackbody radiation. The energy of a
wave and its frequency are related by this man's namesake constant, which shows that energy is released in
discrete packets. For 10 points, name this physicist, a pioneer in quantum mechanics.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This man's namesake particle is a black hole with a Schwarzchild radius close to its Compton
wavelength, while his namesake unit of time is equal to 5.39 times 10 to the -40 seconds. A series of
equations used to describe Brownian motion are named for this man and Fokker. One equation
named for him, whose peak can be found by Wien's [veenz] law, resolved the (*) ultraviolet
catastrophe by correcting the Rayleigh-Jeans law. His namesake postulate states that the energy of a photon
equals h times frequency, which he discovered while working with blackbodies. For 10 points, name this
man who postulated that energy is quantized and comes in multiples of his namesake constant.
ANSWER: Max Planck
This constant appears in the Moyal product on the symmetric algebra, leading to its appearance as the
commutator of the two generators of the Heisenberg lie algebra. The Z component of angular momentum of
a rotationally invariant quantum system is an integer multiple of this constant, and the commutator of the
position and momentum operators is proportional to this constant. As a result, it is proportional to the lower
bound on measurement error given by the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. For 10 points, name this
physical constant, which also appears as the unit of energy quantization in the simple harmonic oscillator
and is the constant of proportionality between the energy and frequency of a photon.
ANSWER: Planck's constant
A constant of proportionality in the Josephson effect equals twice the elementary charge divided by
this quantity. In cgs units, the fine structure constant can be written as the square of the elementary
charge over the product of the speed of light and one form of this quantity. The de Broglie
wavelength of a particle equals this quantity (*) divided by the particle's momentum, and the energy of a
photon equals this quantity times its frequency. Dirac's constant equals this quantity divided by two pi, and
is also called the reduced version of it. For 10 points, identify this constant approximately equal to six point
six times ten to the negative thirty-four joule-seconds, usually denoted h and named for a physicist who
discovered the correct law of blackbody radiation.
ANSWER: Planck's constant [prompt on h, accept h bar until the end of the clue about deBroglie wavelength]
This quantity's namesake found its value after solving Wien's displacement law, and Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle states that two times the product of uncertainty in position and momentum is
greater than or equal to the reduced value of this constant. Its namesake solved the problem of the
(*) ultra-violet catastrophe, and this constant times frequency gives the energy of a photon, demonstrating
that energy is quantized. This quantity is roughly equal to 6.62 times ten to the negative 34th Joule-seconds.
For ten points, identify this constant named after a German mathematician, often symbolized h.
ANSWER: Planck's constant
A more precise value of this quantity, which may be found using a watt balance, would allow a better
definition of the kilogram. In CGS units, the electron's charge squared, divided by the speed of light,
divided by this quantity, equals the fine structure constant. The de Broglie wavelength of a particle can be
found by dividing this quantity by the particle's momentum. When this constant, which is the quantum of
action, is divided by twice pi, it is shown with a bar through it. For 10 points, name this physical constant,
symbolized h and named for a German.
ANSWER: Planck's constant [prompt on h]
This value equals twice the elementary charge divided by the Josephson constant. The energy of a
wave times its wavelength divided by the speed of light yields this value. The uncertainty principle
states that the product of two uncertainties must be greater than it divided by four pi. Angular
momentum is quantized in units of this quantity measured in Joule-seconds. A (*) reduced form of it
is divided by two-pi and is represented with a bar on it. It is the proportionality constant between a
photon's frequency and its energy. For ten points, name this constant equal to about 6.63 times 10 to the
negative 34th, symbolized h and named for a German physicist.
ANSWER: Planck's constant (or h, accept reduced Planck's constant, h-bar, or Dirac's constant before "bar")
When this value is multiplied by the square of the Josephson constant and the von Klitzing constant, the
product is four, and this value was first developed to explain Wien's (veen-s) displacement law. This value
equals wavelength times momentum for a de Broglie wave, and when this value is divided by four pi it
gives the product of the error margins in Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. This value is also equal to
wavelength times energy divided by the speed of light for photons, and in the photoelectric effect it is
multiplied by frequency to calculate energy. Name this constant that reflects the size of quanta.
ANSWER: Planck's constant or h
This quantity divides the product of Boltzmann's constant and a term for temperature on one side of the
general form of the Eyring equation. The square of elementary charge times c times the magnetic constant,
all divided by two times this quantity yields the fine structure constant. A reduced form of this quantity
divides it by two pi and is named for Dirac. Dividing this quantity by linear momentum yields a particle's
de Broglie wavelength, and the energy of a photon is equal to this constant times frequency. For 10 points,
identify this constant which is equal to about 6.626 times 10 to the power of negative 34 Joule-seconds.
ANSWER: Planck's constant [prompt on h]
Dividing by this quantity nondimensionalizes many phase space integrals in statistical mechanics.
It is multiplied by i to give the commutator between position and momentum. Taking this quantity to
zero gives a system's classical limit; accordingly, it appears in the ground state energy of the
quantum harmonic oscillator and the numerator of the de Broglie wavelength. This quantity over 4
pi gives a lower bound on the products of (*) uncertainties according to the Heisenberg principle, which
is often written using its "reduced" version. For 10 points, identify this quantity symbolized h, named for a
German originator of quantum physics.
ANSWER: Planck's constant [or h until it is read; or reduced Planck's constant until "4 pi" is read; or h-bar until "4 pi" is read]
This constant appears multiplied by two over the speed of light squared in its namesake's law of
blackbody radiation. When divided by two pi, it is "reduced" and the letter representing it has a bar
through it. That reduced form of this constant, divided by two, is a lower bound for the product of
the errors of a particle's position and momentum according to Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. For 10
points, identify this constant of proportionality between a photon's frequency and energy, equal to
approximately 6.6 times 10 to the -34th joule-seconds, symbolized h.
ANSWER: Planck's constant [prompt on h before it is read]
This value is found cubed in the denominator of Rydberg's constant. A "reduced" form of this
value is found by dividing it by two times pi and is used in calculating the angular momentum of a
subatomic particle. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle is typically written as the change in
position times the change in momentum is greater than or equal to (*) this value. For 10 points, name
this constant equal to about 6.626 times ten to the negative thirty-fourth power, named for the German
developer of quantum theory.
ANSWER: Planck's constant [prompt on h]
Classical physics can be defined as the limit of quantum mechanics as this quantity tends to zero. It
was originally proposed in reference to black-body radiation, where E, the quantized energy of the
photons of radiation, equals this quantity times nu, the frequency. A related constant which is useful
when calculating with angular frequency instead of constant frequency is called (*) Dirac's constant,
and is simply this constant divided by 2 pi. It is denoted by the letter "h" and has a value of approximately
6.626 times 10-34 Joule-seconds. FTP, name this physical constant named after a German physicist, which
describes the sizes of quanta.
ANSWER: Planck constant or Planck's constant (prompt on "h" early, do not accept "h-bar")
This value is in the denominator of the Eyring ["airing"] equation when the reaction rate is solved
for. This value is divided by the elementary charge squared to find the von Klitzing constant, which
is used for a version of the Hall effect. This value equals the momentum of a particle times its
de Broglie [d--braw-ee] wavelength. This value is divided by 2 pi to find the Dirac constant, which
is also known as the "reduced" version of this constant and is used in the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle. This value also equals the ratio of a particle's energy to frequency. Name this physical
constant used in quantum mechanics that is represented by a lowercase h.
ANSWER: Planck's constant [prompt on h; do not accept "reduced Planck's constant"; do not prompt on "h-bar"]
In the definition of the Rydberg constant, this quantity is raised to the negative third power and to
the negative first power in the definition of Sommerfield's fine-structure constant. The wavelength of
a particle equals this value over its momentum according to the de Broglie definition. This constant's
(*) reduced form, useful when calculating with angular frequency, is called Dirac's constant, and has a
"bar" over it. This constant was determined by examining black body radiation of photo electrons, in its
namesake's law. For ten points, name this constant equal to 6.626 times 10 to the negative 32nd power
Joule-seconds, named after a German physicist, symbolized "h."
ANSWER: Planck's constant (or h before mention)
Integrating this expression over all frequencies and solid angles gives an expression for power as
proportional to the temperature raised to the fourth, a result known as the Stefan-Boltzmann equation. This
equation can be derived by assuming the quantization of photon energy and it reproduces both the RayleighJeans low-frequency limit and the Wien high frequency limit. For 10 points, identify this law that gives the
energy distribution of radiation from a perfect blackbody and was named for a German physicist whose
namesake constant figures prominently in it.
ANSWER: Planck's law
This law, calculated analytically with the Gaussian integral, improved upon a doubly-eponymous law,
whose inaccuracies developed at either very small or very large values, depending on the units used. Its
creator spent many years experimentally fitting curves to find its value, yet only when statistical mechanics
was invented could it be derived in a theoretical manner. The properties of this law led its creator to the
conclusion that radiation was emitted in small packets, called quanta. FTP, name this law, which relates the
intensity of the emitted electromagnetic radiation of a black body with its frequency at all temperatures.
ANSWER: Planck's Law
Their existence can be confirmed through techniques such as astrometry, radial velocity, and pulsar timing.
The Kepler mission seeks to find one variety of these, which are defined as objects with true masses below
the limiting mass for the thermonuclear fusion of deuterium. The discovery of Eris forced a redefinition of
these celestial bodies, and satellites orbiting them will eventually break apart if they are within the Roche
limit. FTP, what is this group of objects to which Pluto no longer belongs.
ANSWER: planets
The layers of the Little Ghost, one of these, are red furthest from the center. The Rotten Egg is a proto-one,
and exhibits the bipolar structure typical of others like the Butterfly. One found in Draco is called the Cat's
Eye and has a concentric shell structure, suggesting it was formed by a series of regular events. Magnetic
fields lead to filamentation in them, and matter bounded ones are fully plasma, while UV bounded ones
possess an ionization front. FTP, identify this class of nebulae, all of which have a star in their center,
composed of the hydrogen and helium ejected outer layers of red giants.
ANSWER: planetary nebulae (accept nebulae before "proto," prompt on nebulae after "proto")
Double layers of this substance are found in Birkeland currents, and Hannes Alfven claimed that if
enough of it was present, a galaxy-wide magnetic field could be created. One type of this substance is
called "quark-gluon soup", and the solar wind is a stream of it. (*) St. Elmo's Fire and Ball Lightning
are made up of this state of matter, which also causes the aurora borealis. Consisting mainly of ionized gas
is, for ten points, what "fourth state" of matter?
ANSWER: Plasma
Alfven Waves occur in these substances, and the Langmuir Probe is used to measure them. The quark-gluon
type of these may have been created at Brookhaven RHIC, and these entities are studied in Tokamaks,
which attempt to create nuclear fusion. Polar auroras and ball lightning are examples of this type of
substance, and this state of matter exists when ionization occurs at extremely high temperatures, . For 10
points, name this substance similar to ionized gas, the "fourth state of matter."
ANSWER: Plasmas
The Vlasov equation governs long-range interactions in these substances, which screen out electric fields
above the Debye (dih-BAHY) length. They are confined by a magnetic field in the donut-shaped
"tokamak." The Large Hadron Collider is attempting to produce the quark-gluon type of them. They were
named by Irving Langmuir for their resemblance to a component of blood and are seen in solar wind, neon
signs, stars, and a type of TV screen. For 10 points, name this "fourth" state of matter.
ANSWER: plasmas
The LHC's ALICE is an experiment to create a substance of this type consisting of asymptotically free
quarks and gluons. The average number of electrons in a substance of this type in a Debye sphere is this
substance's namesake parameter lambda. A tokamak magnetically confines substances of this type to a
torus. Substances of this type are studied by Langmuir probes and created through the Townsend discharge.
The heliosphere is defined by the extent of a substance of this type emitted by the sun, the solar wind, and
these are created by ionizing a gas at high temperatures. For 10 points, name this fourth state of matter
present in stars, neon signs, and lightning.
ANSWER: plasmas
This substance names rapid oscillations of electron density that occur in conducting materials.
One important value used to understand these substances is the distance over which their charge
carriers screen out electric fields; that value can be measured using Langmuir probes and is named
for Debye. These substances can be confined in a (*) tokamak, which uses magnetic fields. These
substances are essentially ionized gases. For 10 points, name this state of matter found in stars and the
aurora borealis.
ANSWER: plasma
The name of these substances was coined by Irving Langmuir, who also developed a type of probe
to investigate them. These substances contain a layer of positive charge called a Debye sheath whose
thickness is measured in Debye lengths. Because of their makeup, they are assumed to have infinite
conductivity. This type of compound forms the composition of a (*) star and are used to excite
phosphors in modern televisions. For 10 points, name this so called fourth state of matter that consists of
ionized gas particles.
ANSWER: plasma
The velocity of particles in this state can be characterized by the Vlasov equation, and another aspect of this
state is characterized by the Saha-Langmuir equation. Instabilities in these substances are often caused by
Birkeland currents, and one form of oscillations in these are called Alfven waves. Rarefied forms of these
substances are insulated by a Debye sheath. Other varieties found in space containing large particles are
called "grain" and "dusty". A form of this on ships is called (*) St. Elmo's fire. This state was first
discovered in a Crookes tube, but it is more commonly found in lightning and TV displays. Flame is an
instance of, for ten points, this fourth state of matter composed of partially ionized gas.
ANSWER: plasma
Charge carriers in this substance can screen out electric fields at the Debye length. It is believed that
one type of it composed of quarks and gluons existed soon after the Big Bang. St. Elmo's fire and coronal
discharge both produce this substance. It can be created when sources of high temperature, such as stars
and lightning, strip electrons from atomic nuclei, leaving a soup of charged particles. For 10 points, name
this ionized substance that is often called a fourth state of matter.
ANSWER: plasma
Alfven waves occur in these substances, while longitudinal space charge waves experience Landau damping
in them. They can be modeled with the Vlasov-Poisson equations, and they carry Birkeland currents. The
screening out of electric fields by electrons occurs over a scale known as the Debye length, and examples
include St. Elmo's Fire, lightning, and very small grains. For 10 points, name this state of matter, typically
an ionized gas.
ANSWER: Plasmas
The square root of electron density times charge squared over mass times the permittivity constant gives the
frequency of oscillation in this substance. One equation dealing with this substance relates temperature and
density to ionization state; that is the Saha equation. The pinch effect often takes place in this kind of
substance. Debye screening prevents electric fields from affecting substances in this state at large distances.
The coronal heating problem may exist because Alfven waves change into other waves in this substance in
the sun. It can be measured by a Langmuir probe. Name this type of matter found in the ionosphere which is
notably not gaseous, liquid, or solid.
ANSWER: plasma
When these substances have an anisotropic momentum distribution, they are subject to Weibel instabilities,
and columns of these substances with strong axial currents develop Kink oscillations. One type of wave in
them is characterized by the Lundquist number, and long-range interactions in them are taken into account
in the Vlasov equation. Langmuir probes are used to determine their properties, and they move across
magnetic fields in Bohm diffusion. These substances screen electric fields up to the Debye length, and the
quark-gluon type is of interest in QCD. Studied in tokamaks, this substance is usually created on earth by
electric arcs. FTP, name this fourth stage of matter commonly found in stars.
ANSWER: Plasma
This substance contains a several Debye lengths layer known as the Debye sheath. The temperature of one
part of this substance can be measured using a Langmuir probe, and the transfer of energy between particles
and the wave results in Landau damping. A traveling oscillation that propagates in the direction of the
magnetic field, known as an Alfven wave, can be found in this substance, which is confined by a magnetic
field in a donut-shaped tube called a tokamak. Present in a fluorescent light bulb, it is also located in fusion
reactors and the interior of the sun. For 10 points, name this ionized gas that is often called the fourth state
of matter.
ANSWER: plasma
This substance displays a Bennett pinch and will often obey the Carlqvist relation, and transverse ion waves
named for Alfven occur in these materials. One special case of z-pinches in these materials is called a
Birkeland current. These entities possess net positive layers called Debye sheaths, and an important
temperature and density measure of these materials may be obtained by a Langmuir probe. For 10 points,
name this phase exhibited by Tesla coils and lightning bolts, a partially ionized gas often considered to be
the fourth state of matter.
ANSWER: plasma
The strongly interacting type of this substance occurs when the Coulomb interaction energy exceeds thermal
energy and results in the placement of particles in a Debye sphere. Alfven waves are characteristic of this
substance in space and electrostatic Langmuir waves only propagate in this substance. The self-consistent
motion of this substance produces electric and magnetic fields which results in high energy acceleration and
generates sychrotron radiation. Auroras, the earth's magnetic field, and comet tails are generated by this
substance in the form of solar wind. For 10 points, what is this conducting medium, composed of charged
particles produced by the ionization of gas atoms?
ANSWER: plasma
This phenomenon can occur in a "dusty" variant produced by macroscopic dust particles. Tonks
and Langmuir name oscillations in this kind of material. If those waves are shorter than the Debye
length, they will undergo a collisionless amplitude loss called Landau damping in this substance. In
the earth's magnetic field, this comprises the (*) Van Allen belt. Solar wind is made up of this, as are
comet tails. This substance is created when part of a gas is ionized with equal parts positive and negative
charges. For 10 points, name this "fourth state of matter."
ANSWER: plasma
Kinks may be formed in these when the Kruskal-Shafranov limit is reached. They can be modeled with the
Vlasov-Poisson equations. Alfven waves occur in these substances, while longitudinal space charge waves
experience Landau damping in them. Their properties can be measured with a Langmuir probe, and the
screening out of electric fields by electrons occurs over a scale known as the Debye length. One type is
composed of deconfined quarks and gluons, and other examples include St. Elmo's Fire, lightning, and very
small grains. For 10 points, name this state of matter, typically an ionized gas.
ANSWER: plasmas
Anisotropic velocity distributions in these substances give rise to Weibel instabilities. Long-range
interactions within them are modeled by the Vlasov-Maxwell equations. Quarks and gluons compose one
type of these substances, which screen out electric fields up to the Debye length. They comprise 95% of the
visible universe and comprise the solar wind. In a common application, these substances are found in
phosphor-coated cells containing xenon or neon gas. Found in fire, lightning, stars, and a certain type of TV
display, for 10 points, name this state of matter consisting of ionized gas.
ANSWER: plasma
One piece of equipment associated with these substances measures the electron energy distribution
function and is called a Langmuir probe. Another piece of equipment uses a toroidal magnetic field
to confine these substances. This type of substance is created at high (*) temperatures when electrons
gain enough kinetic energy to escape the pull of the nucleus. For 10 points, name this type of substance that
makes up stars such as the Sun, and which is an ionized gas commonly known as the fourth state of matter.
ANSWER: plasmas [prompt on ionized gas]
The quasiparticles that represent excitations in these entities are localized due to charge-transfer
complexes in surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Warm electrons in these substances follow a
dispersion relation named for Bohm and Gross, and Bennett pinches are filamentary structures that
form in them. A type of low-frequency oscillation in these substances is known as an (*) Alfven Wave.
The formation of these substances is described by Saha equation, and they can be modeled with the Vlasov
equation. Their characteristics may be determined by a special electrode called a Langmuir probe, and they
exhibit a characteristic interaction length named for Debye. Exemplified by lightning, for 10 points, name
this fourth phase of matter composed of an ionized gas.
ANSWER: plasmas
The paper introducing this model used a series of calculations to investigate "the stability and periods
of oscillation of a number of corpuscles". Though this model is sometimes named for another scientist,
it was developed by Lord Kelvin as an improvement on Alfred Mayer's magnets. This model lost
support due to an experiment by Marsden and Geiger. This model was the first to account for
the location of negative charge in electrons, but this assumed that positive charge was uniformly
distributed instead of in a nucleus. Name this J. J. Thomson atomic model named for food.
ANSWER: plum pudding model [accept Thomson model before "Thomson"]
Sublimation of its surface ice causes a pseudo-anti-greenhouse effect, leading to its surface being about 10
K colder than would otherwise be expected. Despite early enthusiasm, it was quickly proved not to be
Planet X due to its apparent magnitude of 15.1. The New Horizons spacecraft will be used to study this
object and its moons in 2015. In 2006, two new moons of this object were recognized, Nix and Hydra.
However, because it shares orbital neighbors with members of the Kuiper belt, that year also saw the IAU
strip its designation as a planet. Name this dwarf planet, formerly the ninth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Pluto
This object was named by an English schoolgirl, Venetia Burney, while related objects dubbed S/2011
and S/2012 have not been named yet. Discovered by Clyde Tombaugh, it ran afoul of the IAU for not
having "cleared the neighborhood of its orbit." The discovery of the object named Eris led to a change in
scientific perception of this object. The intended target of the New Horizons mission, this object has such
moons as Nix, Hydra, and Charon (CAR-awn). For 10 points, name this object which in 2006 was
downgraded to the status of "dwarf planet."
ANSWER: Pluto
This celestial object is the largest in a namesake class of bodies that have 2:3 mean motion resonance
with a certain larger body. Nix and Hydra are two satellites of this body, the presence of which was
originally predicted by Perceval Lowell. The New Horizons probe is en route to this celestial object.
The discovery of Eris raised controversy regarding this object, which was discovered by Clyde (*)
Tombaugh. It and its largest satellite are sometimes referred to as a binary planet system, although Charon
is still officially classified as a moon of this body. This body's highly eccentric orbit occasionally brings it
closer to the Sun than Neptune. For ten points, identify this celestial object that was stripped of its "planet"
status in 2006.
ANSWER: 134340 Pluto (sadly accept 134340; prompt on Nix, Hydra, or Charon until Nix and Hydra are mentioned)
2011 saw the discovery of a fourth moon of this object, whose other satellites include Hydra and Nix.
James Christy discovered this object's largest moon, which is in synchronous orbit around it and therefore
never rises or sets. That moon is about half the size of this Kuiper Belt object, which has consequently not
"cleared its neighborhood." For 10 points, Charon is the largest satellite of what celestial body, which in
2006 was "demoted" to dwarf planet?
ANSWER: Pluto
Venetia Burney supplied the name for this astronomical object after James Christy discovered it. This
object is the endpoint of the New Horizons mission, and its smaller moons are named Nyx, Hydra, and
Styx. The size of its moon was one of the factors that led to its demotion to dwarf-planet status. For 10
points, identify this former ninth planet.
ANSWER: Pluto
The name for this celestial object was suggested by eleven-year old schoolgirl Venetia Burney. This
object was discovered using a blink comparator. Following the direction of Percival Lowell, this object was
discovered in 1930 by Clyde Tombaugh while looking for the mythical Planet X. After the discovery of
Eris, this body was demoted in 2006 to dwarf planet status. For 10 points, name this former planet orbited
by Charon.
ANSWER: Pluto
An attempt using the Hubble Telescope to find rings around this object led to the new discovery of moons
orbiting it in 2011 and 2012. Two other moons moving around this were discovered by the Hubble
Telescope in 2005. In 2015, it will be visited by the New Horizons spacecraft. This was originally
discovered because of a search encouraged by a miscalculation of the orbit of two planets; that discovery
took place at the Lowell Observatory in 1930 by Clyde Tombaugh. Its moons discovered in 2005 are Nix
and Hydra, and its moon that is about half its size is Charon. Name this object occasionally within the orbit
of Neptune that used to be considered a planet but is now classified as a dwarf planet.
ANSWER: Pluto
One group of objects classified for being similar to this body includes 28978 Ixion and 38628 Huya, and
another group of objects classified for being similar to this body includes Makemake [mah-kee-mah-kee]
and Haumea [how-MAY-uh]. A flyby of the system in which this is the largest object will take place in
2015 by the New Horizons Spacecraft. This object was discovered at the Lowell Observatory by Clyde
Tombaugh, and it was reclassified in 2006. Name this object near Nix, Hydra, and Charon that used to be
classified as a planet.
ANSWER: Pluto
One moon of this body was nearly named Vulcan due to an endorsement from William Shatner. This object
was the most notable nearby object discovered by the use of a blink comparator. The existence of this
object was inferred from observations made by Percival Lowell, and its name was suggested by the 11-yearold Venetia Burney, though it was actually discovered by Clyde Tombaugh. This object, the destination of
the New Horizons probe, exhibits at 2:3 orbital resonance with Neptune, whose orbit it occasionally
intersects when viewed from above the ecliptic. For 10 points, name this dwarf planet that forms a binary
system with Charon, formerly the ninth planet.
ANSWER: Pluto
In 2011 it was discovered that this celestial object is orbited by S/2011 P 1. Named by Venetia
Burney, this celestial object is orbited by Nix and Hydra and has a 3:2 orbital resonance with a
larger object. When the scattering disk is excluded, this celestial object, discovered by Clyde
(*) Tombaugh, is the largest object in the Kuiper belt. In 2015, this dwarf planet is set to be visited by the
New Horizons probe. This dwarf planet forms a binary system with its largest moon Charon. For 10 points,
name this dwarf planet that used to be the ninth planet of the solar system.
ANSWER: Pluto
The argument of pericenter figures in the Kozai mechanism, which explains why this entity is
protected from encounters with a certain other body. Deviation in its temperature are explained by the
anti-greenhouse effect. Albedos of 0.04 to 0.35 are assumed for two of its satellites, Nix and Hydra. A
short-term reduction in gravity was jokingly attributed to Jupiter and this entity, which is the largest
distinct object in the scattered disc subregion of the Kuiper belt. Discovered by Clyde Tombaugh, for 10
points, name this dwarf planet that was reclassified in 2006.
ANSWER: Pluto
It's not the Earth, but Robin Canup argued that this body underwent a giant impact leading to
satellite creation. Its atmosphere has recently been shown to have CO, was discovered by star
occultation, and seems to undergo large seasonal changes in pressure due to sublimation. This body
is orbited by a satellite discovered in (*) 2011. It is in a 3:2 orbital resonance with another body in that
part of the solar system. Like Triton, it is covered with frozen nitrogen and methane. It will be visited by
the New Horizons mission. Two of its more recently discovered moons are Nix and Hydra. This distant
object spends part of its orbit closer to the Sun than Neptune. Its largest moon is Charon. For 10 points,
name this dwarf planet that was once considered to be the 9th planet.
ANSWER: Pluto
The discovery of one satellite of this object was confirmed by a five year period of regular solar eclipses
viewed from it. After the Hubble Telescope discovered a fifth body orbiting this body in 2012, the flight
path of the New Horizons spacecraft may have to be diverted on approach in 2015. The discovery of
(*) Sedna and Eris helped cause a change in the classification of this body because it does not "clear the
neighborhood" of its orbit. Charon is one of this body's moons, and it was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh.
For 10 points, name this dwarf planet formerly known as the ninth planet of the solar system.
ANSWER: 134340 Pluto
Bodies that orbit this object include Kerberos and Styx, which were named in 2013. This Kuiper Belt
object will be visited by the New Horizons probe in 2015. It was nearer to the Sun than (*) Neptune
for 20 years in the 20th century, but, because it doesn't clear the neighborhood around its orbit, a 2006 IAU
reclassification "demoted" it. Hydra, Nix, and Charon orbit, for 10 points, what dwarf planet, the former 9th
planet of the solar system?
ANSWER: Pluto
For an incompressible flow, one method of solving the Navier-Stokes equation involves taking the
divergence of the momentum terms to find a "pressure" version of this equation. The timeindependent Klein-Gordon equation reduces to one version of it, which has an extra lambda-squared
term subtracted from one side. Solutions to that modification of this equation are sums of Yukawa
potentials. An exponential term is added to one side of this equation in an extension commonly used
to model solvation; that extension is co-named for (*) Boltzmann. For gravity, one side of this equation
is four pi G rho, and this equation is commonly solved using the method of images. For 10 points, name this
equation which states that negative free-charge density equals del squared of the potential, the
inhomogeneous version of Laplace's equation.
ANSWER: Poisson equation
This is the brightest star in a circular asterism known as the "Engagement Ring." This secondmagnitude star was classified by Ptolemy as third-magnitude, suggesting it may be twice as bright as
it was two thousand years ago. It is the brightest Cepheid variable, and it lies along the line
connecting Dubhe and Merak. Its most notable (*) characteristic will be usurped by Vega in a few
thousand years. For 10 points, name this brightest star in Ursa Minor at the end of the Little Dipper, also
known as the North Star.
ANSWER: Polaris [prompt on North Star before mentioned]
In 2012, David Turner claimed that this star was significantly closer than 434 light-years away, which is the
distance found by the satellite Hipparcos in the 1990s. This is the closest Cepheid [SHE-fee-id] variable to
Earth, though it is actually a triple star. This can be located by drawing a line starting in Merak and going
through Dubhe [DOOB-hee], and it is also at the end of the handle of the Little Dipper. This star plays a
role that used to be played by Draco [DRAY-koe]. Name this star useful to navigators because of its
Northern location.
ANSWER: Polaris (or Alpha Ursae Minoris) (prompt on "North Star" or "Ursa Minor")
This property is used in a namesake form of spectroscopy where a pumping process creates unequal
saturation and non-uniform m sublevels. Ellipticity and intensity are among a four component vector
representation of this concept. Muller matrices allow manipulation of the aforementioned Stokes vectors.
Nicol prisms cause this, partly because they are made of a birefringent material. Waves can have elliptical,
circular, vertical or horizontal types of this. LCDs and sunglasses use material to alter this property of light.
For 10 points, name this term given to electromagnetic radiation where the distribution of the electric field
components of the waves is constrained.
ANSWER: polarization [accept word forms like polarized]
Analyzing the partial form of this phenomenon is aided by the Wiener and Wolf matrices, which store
coherency information, while the reflection and transmission coefficients in the Fresnel equations are
dependent on it. When light has an electric field that is p-like, it is said to be tangential plane this, and when
its electric field is s-like, it is sagittal plane this. For 10 points, give this wave property which can be
elliptical, linear, or circular, a description of orientation which can be fixed by sending light through a filter.
ANSWER: polarization [accept word forms]
Rhombs named for Mooney and Fresnel can be used to change this property, while a Kerr Cell uses
the Kerr effect to change this property. The mathematics describing this property share similarities
with fermion spin. Stokes vectors and Mueller matrices can be used to describe this property, though
more commonly Jones matrices describe optical elements that (*) change this quantity. Malus's law
describes the intensity drop due to devices that interact with this property. Reflection at the Brewster angle
results in a beam with a extremal form of this property, and two different indices of refraction occur for
differing values of this in the phenomenon of birefrigence. For 10 points, name this property of a light wave
coming in linear and circular forms that describes the direction of the electric field.
ANSWER: Polarization [accept word forms]
Malus's Law gives the intensity of a light ray after it is subjected to this process. This process is often
performed in commercial products through the use of dichroic materials, and commonly comes in circular
and linear types. It also occurs by reflection when the incident light ray comes in at Brewster's angle. For
10 points, name this process by which a light ray's waves are made to oscillate in only one direction, which
is commonly done using Polaroid filters.
ANSWER: polarization [or word forms]
Mueller and Jones calculus are used in the presence of this phenomenon. Ferroelectricity results from this
effect, whose ionic form results in anions and cations shifting positions in a crystal. It comes in s-like and plike forms, which are defined by its orientation to the electric field. The D field is equal to the permittivity
of free space times the electric field plus this value, which equals the electric dipole moment per unit
volume. This term also refers to the separation of charges, and molecules exhibit this when affected by van
der Waals forces. For ten points, name this term which describes both making light waves oscillate in a
single plane and creating a separation of charge.
ANSWER: polarization (do not prompt on or accept "polarity")
This term is used to describe a set of potentials which are described by the Hertz vectors. The GoosHanchen effect observed in total internal reflection is a phase shift that affects propagations with one variety
of this property. Different varieties of this property can be transformed into one another by a retarder plate.
Mueller matrices operate on the vector representations of this property, which is described by the I, Q, U,
and V, and the vector of this property rotates in proportion to the Verdet constant during propagation along
a magnetic field in the Faraday effect. Complete transmission occurs at Brewster's angle for light with one
version of this property. Described by the Stokes parameters, for 10 points, identify this property which
comes in linear, circular, and elliptical varieties, and which designates the direction and magnitude of the
electric displacement vector.
ANSWER: polarization
A quantum electrodynamical vacuum can change this property through the spontaneous creation of
virtual electron-positron pairs. The magnitude of change in this due to traversing a diamagnetic material is
given by the path length times the magnetic field times the Verdet constant; that change in the angle of this
is known as Faraday rotation. This property is described by the Jones calculus. The transmission coefficient
for an item that imparts this property is equal to the cosine squared of a characteristic angle according to
Malus' law. The simplest types of this are circular and linear. For 10 points, name this property of light
waves that describes the direction that fields comprising the light oscillate in and that can be imparted a
filer.
ANSWER: polarization [accept word forms like polarized or polarizing]
In a plasma, the component of the drift velocity given this name is proportional to the time derivative
of the electric field. The opposite of the divergence of another quantity of this name is equal to the
bound charge density. That quantity given this name is defined as the electric dipole moment per unit
volume. The angle at which one form of this property occurs can be altered by the presence of a
magnetic field in the (*) Faraday effect. The intensity drop caused by devices which alter this property is
given by Malus's Law. This property can be altered by quarter wave plates, which exhibit birefringence. For
10 points, name this property of a wave which describes the direction in which its electric field oscillates,
which comes in elliptical, linear, and circular types.
ANSWER: polarization [accept more specific answers like "polarization drift" or "polarization density"]
Discovered using a calcite crystal, a law governing materials that cause this phenomenon states that the
intensity is proportional to the square of the cosine of the angle between those materials, and is called
Malus's law. The elliptic type of this phenomenon occurs to waves of different amplitude. This
phenomenon can occur by long hydrocarbons selectively absorbing light, and its linear variety consists of
waves vibrating only in this property's namesake plane. Name this phenomenon in which transverse waves
always oscillate in the same direction at any given point.
ANSWER: polarization of light waves [accept word forms]
The quadrupole anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background imparts this property upon it,
which can be divided into curl-free and a gradient-free component, known as the E mode and the B
mode. The TRISTAN instrument observed this property in the vacuum, which leads to the creation
of virtual electron-positron pairs. The electric displacement field is equal to the permittivity times the
electric field plus this quantity. An object that imparts this quantity has a fractional transmission of
intensity equal to the square of the cosine of its axis. Dielectrics are particularly susceptible to acquiring
this property, which comes in circular, linear, and elliptical types. Brewster names the angle at which light
with this property is perfectly transmitted. For 10 points, name this property, which can refer to the
separation of charge within a medium or the orientation of the oscillations of a wave .
ANSWER: Polarization (word forms are ok)
Circular states are represented by poles and linear states lie on the equator in the Poincare sphere
representation of this property. Haidinger fringes arise due to this property. Its is characterized by
the (*) Jones calculus, and the Verdet constant determines its response to a longitudinally applied magnetic
field in the magneto-optic Faraday effect. It is generated by crystals that restrict transmitted vibrations to a
specific plane. For 10 points, name this property of electromagnetic radiation where electric vectors
oriented in the same direction.
ANSWER: polarization (or polarized radiation)
The field of this name is defined as the average dipole moment per unit volume of a dielectric
material. A phenomenon given this name can be described by a system in which the multiplication of
Jones vectors by Jones matrices represents the manipulation of this property by a linear optical
element. This property is completely characterized by the (*) Stokes vector and can be altered by phase
retarders. In one form of this property, the electromagnetic field only oscillates in one plane. This property
comes in circular, elliptical and linear forms. For 10 points name this property of light that is exploited to
reduce glare by some sunglasses.
ANSWER: polarization [accept word forms]
This property determines which formulas to use for R and T in the Fresnel equations. The Jones vector
describes this property, as does a quantity computed using Mueller calculus, the Stokes vector. The
Faraday effect is a change in this property caused by a magnetic field, and a ray with this property is
transmitted perfectly at Brewster's angle. It can be elliptical, circular, or linear, and only transverse waves
can have this property. Glare-reducing sunglasses take advantage of this property, which can be achieved
using certain camera lenses. For 10 points, name this property of a wave that oscillates in a single plane.
ANSWER: polarization [accept word forms such as polarized]
The Mueller matrices are invoked whenever effects operating on this phenomenon cannot be represented
by linear transformations on the vector usually used to parametrize this phenomenon, named for Jones.
When it occurs only to a limited extent, the Stokes parameters are used, which can be combined to give the
coherency matrix. Tourmaline was once used to induce this phenomenon, and its direction rotates over
time in the circular variety, while Rob Carson's sunglasses work by creating, via selective transmission, the
plane form of it, which is rotated by chiral molecules. For 10 points, identify this property, which refers to
the orientation in which transverse waves like light oscillate.
ANSWER: light polarization
One method to transition from one type of this phenomenon to another uses a Fresnel rhomb. When
this phenomenon happens twice in succession, the resulting intensity can be found by multiplying by
the cosine squared of theta using the Law of Malus. The shapes used to classify this phenomenon
are based on the shape traced by the tip of the electric field vector, and those shapes are linear,
circular, and elliptic. This phenomenon can occur by setting the incident angle to Brewster's angle
and by double refraction in birefringent materials. Name this phenomenon in which transverse waves
capable of oscillating in many directions are selected based on orientation.
ANSWER: polarization [accept word forms and more specific answers]
The power necessary to maintain this state is proportional to the number of modes within the
system's bandwidth. Once the addition of energy into this state begins to decrease the amount of
entropy, a negative temperature state is formed. This state occurs when a fast transition allows the
on-rate of a metastable state to be faster than its off-rate, and is thus impossible in a (*) two-level
system. Flashlamps and microwaves are used to achieve this condition via pumping, which occurs in a gain
medium. Occurring when more particles are in an excited state than a ground state in a system, this is, For
10 points, what state where stimulated emission dominates spontaneous emission and is the basis of
LASERs.
ANSWER: Population Inversion [prompt on Lasing or word forms of LASERs until the end]
Potassium-argon dating uses the emission of this particle, which is often created when an up quark bonded
with an up and down quark decays into a down quark. A neutrino and this particle are formed when
deuterium is created by the proton-proton chain, and this particle was first invented to account for the
negative energy states predicted by the Dirac equation. This particle was discovered by putting a lead plate
in a cloud chamber while cosmic rays passed through; that experiment involved converting protons into
neutrons and was carried out in 1932 by Carl Anderson. Used to generate gamma rays in a PET scan, name
this subatomic particle with a plus-one charge, the antiparticle of the electron.
ANSWER: positron [accept antielectron before "electron"]
One of these particles exchanges a virtual photon with an electron in Bhabha scattering, and along with a
neutrino, one of these is a side product of the creation of deuterium in the proton-proton chain. A pion and
one of these particles should result from proton decay, and their appearance under normal circumstances
will immediately result in the creation of a photon with 511 keV of energy. They were first postulated as
negative energy solutions to a namesake wave equation by Paul Dirac, and they were discovered in 1932 by
Carl Anderson. For 10 points, name this spin-1/2 particle with positive charge, the antiparticle of the
electron.
ANSWER: positrons [accept beta-plus particle; accept antielectron before "electron" is read]
The track of one of these particles is the spur in the spur model of the formation of a larger structure
containing this entity. The FERMI and ATIC projects have detected an anomalous excess of these particles
in the GeV range. The creation of these particles from one source causes that source to release 1.27 MeV
photons. This is one half of a duo named for Dalitz. These particles are produced from sodium 22. A form
of spectroscopy that determines their lifetime looks for the 511 keV photons that indicate their destruction.
These particles are produced when a gamma ray creates an electron and one of them in pair production. For
10 points, name these spin 1/2 positively charged particles that are the antiparticles of electrons.
ANSWER: Positron [accept anti-electron before "electron," do not accept or prompt on just "electron"]
Project PAMELA discovered an abundance of these particles while orbiting the Earth in 2008, though the
theory of cosmic strings might explain the result. FDG is a radioactive tracer whose emission of these
particles results in annihilation, and the resulting gamma rays feature in a medical imaging technique named
for them. They were predicted as a consequence of the Dirac equation, and their existence was proven by
sending cosmic rays through a cloud chamber leading to diverging beams of charged particles, a result
explainable by antimatter. For 10 points, identify this particle discovered by Carl Anderson, an anti-electron
usually written as e-plus.
ANSWER: positrons [accept anti-electron before mentioned]
A procedure that makes use of these particles uses fludeoxyglucose (FLOO-de-ox-ee-GLOO-cos) as a
tracer to measure the metabolic activity of tissues; that procedure is its namesake "emission tomography."
The existence of this particle was predicted by Dirac in relation to his namesake equation. This particle was
discovered by Carl Anderson, as the first example of antimatter. For 10 points, identify this positively
charged antiparticle of the electron.
ANSWER: positron
The track of these particles represents the "spur" in the spur model. Sodium-22 is commonly used to
produce these particles, whose destruction in PALS is marked by the emission of a 511keV photon. Carl
Anderson discovered these particles that were predicted by Paul Dirac. Penning traps are used to bring
these particles together with more massive ones to create anti-hydrogen. These particles, and their more
abundant counterpart, are typically produced by pair production. For 10 points, name this positively
charged anti-particle that is the "opposite" of an electron.
ANSWER: positron
The Feynman amplitude is a Fourier transform of the Yukawa type of this, and the mathematical
formulation of another approximates combined effects of Pauli repulsion and van der Waals forces. That
one is named for Lennard-Jones, and a corollary to Stokes's theorem explains that the gradients of these
fields must be state functions and therefore conservative forces. The electric type of this is given as U
divided by q or by kq divided by r for a distance r from a charged particle. For 10 points, give this term
which names a kind of energy coming in gravitational and elastic varieties.
ANSWER: potential [accept things like potential energy or potential field; prompt on voltage]
A form of this quantity is proportional to one-half the rank-four stiffness tensor, and the gradient of this
quantity is equal to force. For a magnetic particle, it equals the dot product of magnetization and the B
field. For simple elastic systems, it is proportional to displacement squared. For 10 points, identify this
physical quantity which is the energy stored in an object upon displacement through some force.
ANSWER: potential energy [or change in potential energy]
Though not free energy, if the Hemholtz kind of this per unit volume is a function of the strain tensor, it is
called the elastic kind of this quantity. A numeric value for it for every point in space for a conservative
force in which the work done is zero when moving along a path starting and ending in the same location.
Caused by a restoring force that tends to pull an object to a lower energy state, the many forms of it include
nuclear, electrostatic, chemical, and gravitational. FTP, name this form of energy that is stored within a
system, and which may be exampled by a ball in mid air just about to begin to fall.
ANSWER: potential energy
Velocity-dependent forces require a generalized version of this quantity, while the Lagrangian operator
subtracts this quantity from a related quantity. A conservative force is equal to the gradient of this, while its
electrostatic variety is measured in volts. It is often defined as zero for a charged particle an infinite distance
away from a source of Coulomb force, and for a uniform gravitational force, the difference in this quantity
between two positions of an object is proportional to the difference in their heights. For 10 points, name this
physical concept which refers to the ability of an object to perform work, often symbolized U and
contrasted with kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on "potential" before "Lagrangian" is read]
Two times this quantity plus four times a related quantity give the second time-derivative of moment of
inertia in a gravitational field. For a given inverse-square force, this quantity's average value times one-half
equals that related quantity, according to the virial theorem. When a force is inverse-square, this quantity's
value is inversely proportional to the first power of distance. This quantity is denoted by V and subtracted in
the Lagrangian. This quantity for a spring can be found by integrating Hooke's Law and is equal to "onehalf k x-squared." For a mass in a constant gravitational field, this quantity equals "m-gh". For 10 points,
identify this energy stored in a system, contrasted with kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on just "energy"; do not accept other types of energy]
Quantum tunneling occurs when a particle escapes a well named for this quantity. The Lagrangian of a
system is given by T minus this quantity. The force field is the negative gradient of this quantity. In a
gravitational system, this scalar is usually defined to be zero at infinity. The elastic variety of this is given
by one half k x2. For 10 points, name this term for the energy stored in a system due to its configuration.
ANSWER: potential energy [accept "U"]
This quantity is subtracted from a related quantity to find the Lagrangian; those quantities are
added to find the Hamiltonian. One form of this quantity is proportional to the square of the
displacement of a spring; that (*) "elastic" type is given by one half k x squared, while the gravitational
type is given by mgh. Denoted U, for 10 points, name this energy a physical system has because of its
configuration, contrasted with kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy (prompt on potential; prompt on U before "U"; prompt on V)
One type of this quantity can be expressed as Young's Modulus times area times the change in length
squared, all over twice the initial length. The magnetic variety of this quantity is equal to the negative
magnetic moment dot the magnetic field, while the (*) electric variety of this quantity is equal to q times
V. F can be expressed as the negative gradient of this quantity, and work is expressed as the negative
change in this quantity. For a spring, this quantity is equal to one-half times the spring constant times
displacement squared. For 10 points, identify this quantity most commonly written as m g h, often
contrasted with kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on just energy; do not accept or prompt on kinetic energy]
This quantity can be calculated for a dipole in an electric field by finding the negative dot product of the
moment and the electric field. One method of finding this quantity involves multiplying one-half by the
spring constant and the square of x. It is also calculated by finding product of mass, gravitational
acceleration, and the height of an object, or finding "m g h." For 10 points, identify this energy associated
with an object's position, which is commonly contrasted with kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy
This quantity is equal to the negative of the magnetic dipole moment dotted with the magnetic field.
The electric form of this quantity is equal to Coulomb's constant times the charge of each point charge
divided by the distance between them. For a spring, this quantity is equal to one half times the spring
constant times displacement squared. In general, this quantity is equal to mass times gravitational
acceleration times height. For 10 points, name this energy associated with an object at rest.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on energy]
This quantity cannot be defined for force fields which are functions of odd powers of velocity or for
rotational fields. The shapes of this function's minima determine the stability of equilibria. The derivative of
this function with respect to position is proportional to force. One type of this quantity is defined as zero at
infinity and is described by a "one-over-R" term times the product of the participating masses. The negative
change in this quantity equals work performed. It comes from the arrangement of particles in a system, and
one type equals mass times height above Earth times gravitation. For 10 points, name this type of energy
which is added to kinetic energy to yield total energy.
ANSWER: potential energy [accept potential after "type of energy" is read; do not accept or prompt on "potential" before "type of energy" is read]
In electrostatics, this quantity is defined as the work necessary to move one charge an infinite distance
away from a nearby charge. In mechanics, one type of this quantity is equal to one half times a spring
constant times the square of the distance from equilibrium. Another type of this quantity is the
"gravitational" type, and is equal to the mass times the acceleration due to gravity times the height at which
an object is located. For 10 points, name this type of energy which is stored in a system due to its
configuration or position.
ANSWER: potential energy [or potential after "energy" is read]
One quantity with this appellation is equal to q one times q two over four pi times the electric
constant times the radius. Crucial to defining another quantity known by this name for a system is
the zero point. Systems based on conservative forces always have this property. Force is equal to the
negative (*) derivative of this quantity with respect to position. For gravity, this is equal to mgh. For 10
points, name this term that denotes a form of energy that results from position within a force field, an
example of which is that of a rock at the top of a hill.
ANSWER: potential energy
This quantity for a magnetic moment in the presence of a magnetic field is calculated as the dot product
of negative m and the B-field. Deriving this for two point charges from Coulomb's (COO-lawm's) law
yields k q1 q2 over r. The gravitational form of this quantity is the product of mass, gravitational
acceleration, and height, or m g h. For 10 points, identify this quantity symbolized U, the change of which
is equal to the change in kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy
This can be calculated for a magnetic dipole subject to magnetic field by taking the dot product of the
magnetic moment times negative one and B. This for an object in an electric field is the product of k and
the two charges divided b r. In general this results from having a position within a force field. For a spring,
this is equal to one half times the spring constant times the displacement squared. The value of this for an
object in the Earth's gravity is mgh. For 10 points, name this stored energy that can be transformed into
kinetic energy and is exemplified by a rock on the top of a hill.
ANSWER: potential energy
One empirical function for this is named after Morse, and that function is closely approximated by
another one which contains a one over r to the 6th term. In addition to that one named for Lennard and
Jones, they can be mathematically expressed as negative gradients of conservative force fields. The
product of two charges divided by separation distance is proportional to the one named for Coulomb,
and it is usually held to be zero at infinite separation. For 10 points, identify this type of energy
possessed by an object by virtue of its position.
ANSWER: potential energy
One type of this quantity is calculated as the negative dot product of the magnetic dipole moment
and magnetic field. In a two-body system, this quantity is proportional to the product of the two
masses divided by radius. For a spring, this quantity is equal to one half times the spring constant
times displacement squared. The (*) gravitational form of this quantity is equal to a constant times mass
times height. For 10 points, name this type of energy arising from the configuration of a system which is
contrasted with kinetic.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on energy]
Unstable equilibrium occurs at a local maximum for this quantity when plotted against position,
since force is equal to the negative position derivative of it. In an electric field, it is proportional to
the product of two charges divided by the distance between them. For a spring, it is equal to (*)
one-half k x-squared, while its gravitational form is mgh. For 10 points, name this energy stored in a
system, which is converted into kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on energy]
The magnetic form of this quantity is computed by finding the negative dot product of the dipole moment
and the magnetic field strength. It is subtracted from a related quantity in the Lagrangian, where it is
symbolized V, and equilibrium occurs when this quantity is an extremum with respect to x. For a spring, it is
equal to one-half times the spring constant times displacement squared, while the gravitational form of this
quantity is mass times gravitational acceleration times height. For 10 points, name this energy stored in a
system due to configuration or position, which is converted into kinetic energy.
ANSWER: Potential Energy [prompt on Energy; do not accept "potential"]
When this quantity is constant, the solutions to the time-independent Schrodinger equation are complex
exponentials, and the shape of the graph of this quantity is square for an infinite square well. In the
Hamiltonian or Lagrangian, it is often denoted uppercase V. Negative the gradient, or spatial derivative, of
this property is equal to force, and it is equal to one-half a constant times the (*) displacement squared for a
spring. The chemical form of this property is contained in bonds, and its gravitational form is proportional
to the weight times the height. A swing at its peak has the maximum value of, for 10 points, what type of
energy contrasted with kinetic?
ANSWER: potential energy (prompt on uppercase "P" or uppercase "V"; prompt on "energy"; do not accept or prompt on "kinetic energy")
This quantity is the negative of the magnetic moment dotted with the magnetic field. The virial theorem
multiplies this quantity by negative one-half and equates it to a related quantity. When plotting position
against this quantity, a system experiences an unstable equilibrium phase at a local maximum. This quantity
for a spring is equal to one-half times the spring constant times displacement squared, and the change in this
quantity is the negative of work. This quantity for an object in Earth's gravity is mgh. For 10 points, name
this type of stored energy that arises from an object's position within a system, contrasted with kinetic
energy.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on partial answer; prompt on "U"]
For an electric dipole, this quantity can be computed as the negative dot product of momentum and electric
field, and for a two-particle system, this quantity is equal to the negative product of big G and the particles-
masses over r. For a spring this is equal to one-half k times displacement-squared, and the negative change
in this quantity is work. Coming in elastic and gravitational varieties, For 10 points, name this energy of a
system associated with its configuration, often contrasted with kinetic energy.
ANSWER: Potential Energy
This quantity is equal to the opposite of the dot product of the magnetic dipole moment with the magnetic
field. It is subtracted in a Lagrangian [la-grahn-zhee-an] but added in a Hamiltonian. In a central inverse
square field, it varies inversely with the distance from the center and is generally assigned a negative value.
This quantity is only defined for conservative fields, in which it equals the opposite of the integral of force
with respect to distance. Its existence is due to the ability of the system to change the work that has been
done to it into another form of energy. In a spring, this value is equal to one-half times the spring constant
times the displacement squared, and in a uniform gravitational field it is given as mass times gravitational
field strength times height. Name this type of energy an object has by virtue of its position, often contrasted
with kinetic energy.
ANSWER: potential energy [prompt on potential or energy; accept U; accept gravitational potential energy or elastic potential energy]
The Schrodinger-Riccati equation finds curves of this quantity for hydrogen, and the first
step of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation yields surfaces of this quantity. It is the
negative moment dot the electric field for an electric dipole, and for two charged particles, it
equals the product of the charges and a constant over distance. The Lagrangian of a system
equals kinetic energy minus this quantity, and for a spring this quantity equals half the spring
constant times the displacement squared. For 10 points, name this quantity, the energy of a
system due to position.
ANSWER: potential energy
A variant of this experiment used atoms of rubidium-57 and rubidium-87 with a standing wave tuned
resonantly to the rubidium D1-line. Another variant of this experiment fired a Scout D rocket from Wallops
Island, with an atomic hydrogen maser on board. Modified in the Vissot-Levine experiment, this study used
the cone of a loudspeaker to vary the frequency of photons with initial energies of 14.4 kilo-electron volts,
and was based on the principle that atoms cannot absorb photons emitted by the same species if they have
been Doppler-shifted. Relying on the Mossbauer effect, this experiment used a helium-filled Mylar bag
placed between two iron-57 samples and measured gravitational redshift. For 10 points, name this study
conducted in the tower of Harvard's Jefferson Laboratory to verify general relativity.
ANSWER: Pound-Rebka experiment
The dioptric form of this is the degree to which an optical system causes light to converge or diverge. This
property of a statistical test is the probability the test will not commit a Type II error. The electrical form of
this is equal to the integral of the Poynting vector over an area. The volumetric flow rate times pressure
gives this in fluid systems. The integral of this quantity yields work, and this word is sometimes used in
place of exponent. Name this, the rate at which work is performed or energy converted, with the watt as its
SI unit.
ANSWER: power
In AC circuits, a "factor" named for this quantity is equal to the cosine of the phase angle. In optics,
one form of this quantity is equal to the reciprocal of the focal length. It also equal to sound intensity
times area; taking the ratio of two values of it gives the decibel. In fluid dynamics it is equal to the
pressure times the flow rate. In electrical components this is equal to the square of current times
resistance or voltage times current, while in mechanics it can be defined as torque times angular velocity or
force times velocity. For 10 points, give this term from physics equal to the rate of change of work over
time, typically measured in watts.
ANSWER: power
For a periodic signal, the average of this quantity over the peak value is equal to pulse length over period,
the duty cycles. In chain and belt drives, friction and wear in the chains and belts reduce the output for this
quantity, resulting in a decreased mechanical advantage. In fluid systems, this quantity can be expressed as
pressure times volumetric flow rate. It is equal to current squared times resistance, current times voltage, or
work over time. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in watts.
ANSWER: power [prompt on P]
In a fluid system, this quantity equals pressure times volumetric flow rate. In an AC circuit, the ratio
between the real and apparent varieties of this quantity is known as its namesake factor, while its complex
variety uses units of volt-amperes. Its electrical type equals current times voltage, and in a rotational system
this quantity equals torque times angular velocity. Its integral with respect to time gives the work done on a
system, and it is equal to force dotted with velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity, the rate of change of
kinetic energy or quantity of work done per time, which is measured in watts.
ANSWER: power
This quantity's namesake factor is the ratio between real and apparent values of this quantity and is
calculated by dividing resistance by impedance. This quantity's namesake gain is defined as the ratio of this
quantity at a load to a source. This quantity over unit area yields intensity, and in fluid systems this quantity
equals pressure times the volumetric flow rate. This is the product of the electric potential difference and
the current. For rotational systems, the cross product of torque and angular velocity yields this quantity,
which is equal to the dot product of force and velocity in linear systems. For 10 points, name this amount of
work done per unit time, whose SI unit is the watt.
ANSWER: power [prompt on "P"]
Resistance is the amount of this quantity dissipated divided by the by the square of the current. In
optics, it represents the degree to which a lens converges or diverges light. It can be found by
multiplying the inverse of time by the integral of torque and angular velocity with respect to time, and
it is a function of potential difference and current for electrical systems. For ten points, name this physical
quantity, work divided by time, often measured in watts.
ANSWER: Power
This quantity, for a nonrelativitic accelerating particle, is related to e-squared over c to the third
times the acceleration squared and is given by the Larmor formula. In optics this quantity is
measured in diopters and is equal to one over the focal length. The electric form of this quantity is
equal to voltage (*) squared over resistence. In rotational systems it is given by the torque times angular
velocity, while its integral equals work. For 10 points, name this quantity that is equal to the rate at which
energy is transferred.
ANSWER: power
This quantity for an accelerating electron is given by the Larmor formula. In optics, this quantity for a lens
is measured in diopters, and equals the reciprocal of the focal length. This quantity for a resistor equals the
product of current and voltage drop. The intensity of a sound is equal to this quantity divided by the area. In
general, this quantity is the rate at which energy is transferred from one system to another. For 10 points,
name this quantity usually measured in Watts.
ANSWER: power
In statistics, this quantity is equal to one minus beta, or the Type II error, and is the probability of correctly
rejecting a null hypothesis. The optical type of this is equal to the reciprocal of focal length of a lens. This
term is defined as angular velocity multiplied by torque in rotational systems, and is defined as both I times
R squared and as the current multiplied by the voltage drop in electrical systems. FTP, name this quantity
that has a mechanical form equal to work over time, measured in watts.
ANSWER: Power
In statistics, this term describes the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is indeed false, or the
probability of not committing a type II error; that quantity, which increases with sample size, is given by 1
minus beta. The square of the modulus of a Fourier transform gives the "spectrum" of this type, and the
inverse fourier transform of that spectrum gives the autocorrelation function. In optics, this quantity has
units called diopters which have dimensions of inverse length. In physics, this quantity is equal to the rate
of energy dissipation, and is given by an object's force times its velocity. For 10 points, identify this
quantity which is given in terms of watts.
ANSWER: power
For an object falling only under the influence of gravity, this quantity is jointly proportional to
acceleration raised to the three-halves power and the square root of height. For fluid moving through
a pipe, it can be calculated as the product of volumetric flow rate and pressure. In optics, it is the
reciprocal of focal (*) length. The integral of intensity of a sound wave with respect to area also gives this
quantity. Through a resistor, the amount of it dissipated equal current squared times resistance. For ten
points, name this quantity equal to force times velocity or work over time, measured in watts.
ANSWER: power
For a capacitor, the instantaneous form of this quantity is given by the capacitance multiplied by
the voltage and the time derivative of voltage. The average for this quantity in an AC circuit
incorporates the cosine of the phase angle in its definition, which is its namesake "factor". An optical
quantity with this name is measured in diopters. For a circuit component, this quantity is equal to the
(*) current through it times the voltage drop across it. By converting energy to force times distance, one can
show that this quantity is also defined as force times velocity. For 10 points, what quantity is the rate at
which work is done and has units of Watts?
ANSWER: power
In the first component of four-force, this quantity is divided by the opposite of the speed of light. The SI
unit of this quantity per square meter is divided by ten to the negative twelfth in decibel calculations. For
circular motion this quantity equals torque times angular velocity, and for linear motion this quantity equals
force times velocity. Name this quantity that equals energy per time and that is often measured in watts
ANSWER: power
This quantity's SI unit is used to measure qx which is equal to the thermal conductivity times the
temperature gradient times the area. For a sinusoidal wave, this is proportional to the amplitude squared
times the square of the frequency times the wave velocity. Intensity is this per area. It is equal to current
squared times r. One unit of this is equal to a joule per second. For 10 points, name this quantity which is
work per time and is measured in watts.
ANSWER: power
For AC circuits, the expression for the average of this quantity includes a namesake factor which accounts
for differences in this quantity between DC and AC currents. In fluid systems, this quantity is equal to
pressure times volumetric flow rate. In a rotational system, this quantity equals torque times angular
velocity, while its electrical type can be expressed as both current times voltage and as voltage squared
divided by resistance. Its integral with respect to time gives the work done on a system, and its
instantaneous form equals force dotted with velocity. For 10 points, name this quantity measuring the rate at
which energy is transferred, which is measured in watts.
ANSWER: power
For an accelerating charge experiencing no external forces, this quantity is proportional to the charge
squared times the acceleration squared divided by the speed of light cubed, a result known as the Larmor
formula. For a black body, the amount of this quantity per unit area is equal to temperature to the fourth
power times the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Intensity is equal to this quantity divided by area. In
mechanics, this quantity is equal to the dot product of force with velocity, and in circuits, this quantity is
equal to the product of the current and the voltage. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as the
derivative of work with respect to time, which has units of Watts.
ANSWER: power
For fluid flow, this quantity is equal to flow rate times pressure. For a sinusoidal signal, this quantity is
equal to the absolute value of the amplitude squared. It is equal to current times voltage for electrical
components. In optics, one form of it is measured with diopters. This quantity is also given by the force
dotted by the velocity vector, and its units are Joules per second, or watts. For 10 points, name this quantity
equal to work done per unit time.
ANSWER: power
The points named for half of this value on a transfer function plot are alternately called the 3 dB points.
The cosine of the phase angle is equal to this value's namesake factor. A time-averaged form of this
quantity's density divided by the speed of light gives the radiation pressure. This quantity is equal to the
surface integral of the cross product of the electric and magnetic fields according to Poynting's theorem.
The maximum amount of this quantity is transferred when the load resistance is the same as the Thevenin
resistance. Using Ohm's law, it is found to be current squared times resistance for a resistor. For ohmic
elements, it is often given off as heat. For 10 points, name this quantity that is the amount of energy a
circuit transfers per unit time and is measured in watts.
ANSWER: electrical power
The "optical" or "refractive" type of this quantity is measured in diopters and measures the ability of a
device to focus light. A non-standard unit for this quantity is the ton of refrigeration, and in systems with
flow, it is equal to the product of flow rate and pressure. Radiative intensity or energy flux is defined as
luminosity or this quantity per unit area. In rotational systems, it can be calculated as the dot product of
torque and angular velocity, while in kinematics it is simply given by force times velocity. For 10 points,
name this physical quantity equal to the work done per unit time, often measured in Watts.
ANSWER: power [do not accept "energy flux" or the like]
The autocorrelation function is related by the Fourier transform to the spectral density of this
quantity according to the Weiner-Kinchin theorem. In the relativistic limit, this quantity is
proportional to the sixth power of the Lorentz gamma. One formula giving this quantity is integrated
between two time periods in order to give the magnitude of the radiation reaction, and states that it is
proportional to charge squared times acceleration squared. Those expressions are named for Lienard
and (*) Larmor. Equating the input and output value of this quantity is used to derive the mechanical
advantage. This quantity is given by the integral of the dot product of force and velocity, or the derivative of
work with respect to time. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in watts.
ANSWER: power
In acoustics, this quantity equals sounds intensity times area. In fluid dynamics, it equals pressure
times the volumetric flow rate. In rotational mechanics, this quantity equals angular velocity times
torque. In electricity, it equals current squared times (*) resistance. In kinematics, it equals velocity
times force. It is most simply expressed as work over time. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in
Watts.
ANSWER: power
This quantity is proportional to charge squared times acceleration squared according to the Larmor
formula, and it equals the surface integral of intensity. The optical type of this quantity is the reciprocal of
focal length, and in fluid systems, it equals flow rate times pressure. In electrical systems, it equals current
squared times resistance, or simply current times voltage. For rotational systems, it equals torque times
angular velocity. Calculated as force times velocity, it is the rate at which energy is transferred. For 10
points, name this quantity measured in watts.
ANSWER: power
This term refers to the total radiant flux of a system. For fluids, this quantity is given by the product of
pressure and volumetric flow rate. In circuits, this quantity is equal to voltage squared over resistance. In
rotational systems, it is torque times angular velocity. It can be calculated by multiplying force and velocity.
For 10 points, name this measure of work done in an amount of time, whose unit is the watt.
ANSWER: power
In an AC circuit, the ratio of resistance to impedance gives this quantity's namesake factor. For an
electromagnetic wave, this quantity per unit area is described by the Poynting vector, which gives the
wave's intensity. In a circuit, this quantity is equal to current squared times the resistance, or alternatively
current times the voltage dropped. For a rotational system, it is torque times angular velocity, or it can also
be computed as the dot product of force and velocity. For 10 points, identify this quantity measured in
Watts, which is equal to the work done over the time.
ANSWER: Power
The density of this quantity for an electromagnetic field is found by crossing the electric and magnetic
field's intensities, which yields the Poynting vector. For a sinusoidal wave, this quantity is equal to the
amplitude squared. Another form of this quantity can be found to equal current squared times resistance by
using Ohm's law on the relation voltage times current. The average form of this quantity is equal to work
divided by time. For 10 points, identify this term that denotes the rate at which energy is used, transferred
or converted.
ANSWER: power
A generalization of this quantity that applies to liquid media is also named for Nikolay Umov.
When computing the divergence of the Maxwell stress tensor, this quantity appears divided by
the square of the speed of light and represents the momentum density. The original derivation of
this quantity relies on taking the time derivative of the energy density and then using a theorem
named for the namesake of this quantity, which causes the negative divergence of this quantity to
appear. This quantity is found by taking the cross product of the E-field and the H-field. For 10
points, name this vector quantity symbolized with a boldface S, which represents the flux of
electromagnetic energy, and "points" in the direction of propagation.
ANSWER: Poynting vector [prompt on "intensity"]
One form of this phenomenon accounts for the one-half term reconciling the doublet separation in
hydrogen fine structure with the Lande g factor. This phenomenon is the observable result of
frame-dragging on a particle near a large mass. Pure forms of it occur when nutation is constant.
Classically, the frequency of this phenomenon can be calculated as the spin torque divided by the angular
momentum of the larger rotation. Relativistic forms of this phenomenon are named for de Sitter and
Thomas. The rate of this phenomenon for the perihelion of Mercury was an important verification of
general relativity. It occurs in torque-free and torque-induced forms. For 10 points, name this phenomenon
in which the axis of rotation changes orientation.
ANSWER: precession [or Thomas precession; or de Sitter precession]
One variety of this effect arises from transporting a vector over an accelerated path and is used to
take relativistic time dilation into account when considering spin-orbit coupling; that variety is
named for Thomas. The Lens-Thirring effect is a type of this effect that corrects for the motion of the
orbital plane of a body. When a magnetic field is applied to an electron in motion about a nucleus, it
results in a form of this named for (*) Larmor. In a few thousand years, this phenomenon will cause Vega
to become the North Star. Coming in torque-free and torque-induced varieties, for 10 points, identify this
effect wherein a body's axis of rotation spins, which is is responsible for the wobbling motion of tops.
ANSWER: precession
The Thomas type of this corrects for special relativity, while the Larmor type of it uses this concept to
predict the effect of an applied magnetic field on electrons and nuclei. An instance of this effect caused by
the rotation of the Earth is demonstrated by a Foucault pendulum, and if the second Euler angle is not
constant, nutation occurs in addition to this. In astronomy, this explains why Polaris has not always been the
North Star, and can also mean the slow movement of an orbit's perihelion about the sun. Referring in
general to a change in the orientation of a body's axis of rotation, for 10 points, name this concept from
physics often applied to explain the motion of gyroscopes.
ANSWER: precession
The Thomas correction allows for this behavior to be applied in non-inertial reference frames. The
torque-free variety of this phenomenon occurs because of a lack of symmetry, while the torque-induced
variety can be followed by nutation. Because of this phenomenon, Polaris will one day cease to be the
North Star. This motion can be observed in both the earth and a smoothly spinning top. For 10 points, name
this movement of a body's axis of rotation.
ANSWER: precession
One type of this phenomenon is described by the Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi equation. Eccentricity,
obliquity, and this phenomenon are responsible for the Milankovitch cycles. In a magnetic field, the
magnetic moments of electrons experience the Larmor type of this phenomenon. The periodic oscillation
observed in this phenomenon is known as nutation. The torque-induced type of this phenomenon is
exemplified by the wobbling motion of a gyroscope. For 10 points, name this motion of the rotational axis
of a spinning object.
ANSWER: precession
This type of motion can be modeled with a symmetric rigid rotor in Poinsot's construction.
Magnetic moments of particles experience the Larmor type of this phenomenon around an external
magnetic field, a form used in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. In cases where this motion
causes an (*) axis to make a cone, the direction of this motion is orthogonal to the torque. For 10 points,
name this phenomenon exhibited by gyroscopes, in which the direction of the axis of a rotating body shifts.
ANSWER: precession
This process is quantified as "gamma squared over one plus gamma times a cross v over c squared" for
charged relativistic objects on a curved path. This process corresponds to the "gamma times M of t cross B
of t" term in the Bloch equation, an equation that describes an application of this process quantified by "eB
over 2m." In NMR, this process is measured by the Larmor frequency. A simple example of this has a
frequency of "mgr over omega times moment of inertia." This process causes a 26,000 year cycle in the
Earth's equinoxes. This motion is seen in gyroscopes and spinning tops. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which the axis of rotation of a rotating body shifts.
ANSWER: precession
NMR-related imaging is based on the fact that resonant frequencies of nuclei experience the Larmor type of
this and are proportional to magnetic field strength. For the torque-induced type, one can calculate velocity
of this by dividing torque by spin angular momentum, a quantity often computed for the gyroscopic type
and important in gyrocompasses. For 10 points, name this phenomenon where the axis of a rotating object
changes direction, which can be applied in astronomy to Earth's changing axis as it revolves and rotates.
ANSWER: precession
This type of motion can be modeled with a symmetric rigid rotor in Poinsot's construction.
Magnetic moments of particles experience the Larmor type of this phenomenon around an external
magnetic field, a form used in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. In cases where this motion
causes an (*) axis to make a cone, the direction of this motion is orthogonal to the torque. For 10 points,
name this phenomenon exhibited by gyroscopes, in which the direction of the axis of a rotating body shifts.
ANSWER: precession
The motion of a magnetic moment about a magnetic field, common in nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, is the Larmor type of this phenomenon. While one form of it, which may be visualized with
Poinsot's construction, occurs when an object is close to a maximum or minimum principal axis, and this
phenomenon is called "gyroscopic" when torque-induced. This motion is described by the change in the
first Euler angle and its pure form occurs in the absence of nutation. For 10 points, name this motion of the
axis of rotation of a spinning body.
ANSWER: precession
This name is given to a method, developed by Buerger, of producing an undistorted picture of the reciprocal
lattice in X-ray crystallography. This phenomenon was used by a satellite locked to IM Pegasi, Gravity
Probe B, to test general relativity. A relativistic correction named for it results from the noncommutativity
of nonaligned Lorentz transforms and reduces the spin-orbit interaction by a factor of two. A discrepancy in
this phenomenon for the perihelion of Mercury was resolved by general relativity. It is experienced by a
magnetic moment in an external magnetic field in an effect named for Larmor. Small oscillations around the
path of this phenomenon are called nutations. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which the
rotational axis of a body changes direction, an effect which can be illustrated with a gyroscope and is often
induced by torque.
ANSWER: precession [prompt on relativistic effects]
The amount of this phenomenon that should occur on an object near the earth can be found by
summing the types named after de Sitter and Lense-Thirring. One form of this must be taken into
account because of the relativistic time dilation between electrons and the nucleus, and is named for
Thomas. The magnetic moments of electrons do this in a magnetic field due to the type named after
Larmor. For 10 points, name this process, which also names the "wobble" of the Earth on its rotational
axis.
ANSWER: precession
Llewellyn Thomas gives his name to a relativistic corrected form of this effect, and accurate
prediction of this of the perihelion of Mercury is seen as success for general relativity. This
phenomenon in magnetic fields is named for Larmor. This concept plays a key role in Milankovitch
cycles, and one cycle of this for the Earth is (*) 26,000 years. It can occur when a torque causes a motion
of the angular momentum vector. For 10 points, name this phenomenon seen in seen in the movement of a
spinning top.
ANSWER: precession
In Schwarzchild space, the Fokker-deSitter type of this behavior can occur, while in Kerr space an
additional type of this behavior named for Schiff may occur. The Rashba effect causes one type of this
phenomenon in spin, and another variety of it corrects for time dilation between electrons and the atomic
nucleus and is named after Thomas. One type of this phenomenon is exploited in NMR spectroscopy and
occurs when an external field is applied to magnetic moments, called the Larmor type. Irregularities in axial
motion due to it are called nutation, and it is commonly demonstrated in gyroscopes. For 10 points, name
this physical phenomenon in which the rotational axis of a body changes direction.
ANSWER: Precession
This type of motion impacts climate by creating Milankovitch [mee-lahn-KOH-vich] Cycles. The
axial type of this motion causes a Platonic [pluh-TAH-nik] year, which for Earth is almost twenty-six
thousand times longer than a standard year. The apsidal [AAP-sih-dul] type of this motion is the
change of an orbital path, and the theory of general relativity explained this type motion by the
planet Mercury. Also observed in everyday objects, this motion can be explained by the conservation
of angular momentum when a force acts at an angle to spinning motion. Name this motion seen in
gyroscopes when there is rotation of a rotating axis.
ANSWER: precession
The motion of a magnetic moment about a magnetic field, common in nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, is the Larmor type of this phenomenon. While one form of it, which may be visualized with
Poinsot's construction, occurs when an object is close to a maximum or minimum principal axis, and this
phenomenon is called "gyroscopic" when torque-induced. This motion is described by the change in the
first Euler angle and its pure form occurs in the absence of nutation. For 10 points, name this motion of the
axis of rotation of a spinning body.
ANSWER: precession
The orbit of satellites experience this phenomenon with a frequency proportional to the radius to the
negative seven halfs due to the quadrapole term in the Earth's gravitational field. Since the Moon orbits the
Earth at a slight angle to the Earth's orbit, a variation called nutation is imposed on this effect of the
Equinoxes. There are torque-free and torque-induced varieties of this phenomenon; the torque induced
variety is sometimes known as the "gyroscopic" form. For 10 points, name this shift in the axis of a rotating
body.
ANSWER: precession
Llewellyn Thomas has a relativistic type of this phenomenon named for him and in general relativity a form
of this occurs when a small body orbits a large rotating one, called frame dragging or the Lense-Thirring
effect. General relativity can also explain this process for the perihelion of mercury and the Larmor type is
when the magnetic moment does not stay in the direction of the magnetic field. Occurring when torque is
applied to a spinning object and related to nutation, this is, for 10 points, what motion of the spin axis of an
object demonstrated in a spinning top.
ANSWER: precession
The diagonal terms of the stress-energy tensor represent this quantity. The change in this quantity is
equal to 8 eta L Q over pi r to the fourth according to Poiseulle's equation. This quantity is equal to rho
times g times h in one system, and this quantity is distributed throughout an incompressible fluid according
to Pascal's principle. For 10 points, name this quantity often measured in millimeters of mercury, which is
equal to force divided by area.
ANSWER: pressure
In the free-electron model, this quantity equals two-fifths times the number density times the Fermi
energy. In SI units, the value of this quantity possessed by a B-field is equal to B squared divided by
twice the permeability of free space. One form of this quantity is equal to the time average of the
Poynting vector divided by the speed of light. This quantity is located on the main diagonal of the (*)
stress tensor. For a column of fluid, the change in this quantity is equal to the density of the fluid times
"little g" times the height of the column, which allows for this quantity to be measured using a manometer
or a barometer. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as force per unit area, which is measured in units
such as atmospheres and Pascals.
ANSWER: pressure [prompt on "P," prompt on "normal stress," accept more specific answers like radiation pressure or hydrostatic pressure]
For a photon, this quantity equals power flux density over the speed of light. The hypsometric equation
relates thickness to the natural log of a ratio of two values of this quantity. The change in this quantity is
proportional to density times head loss, and is inversely proportional to the fourth power of pipe radius. An
incompressible fluid transmits this quantity equally in all directions, and an increase in fluid velocity
decreases this quantity. It is inversely proportional to volume, and directly proportional to temperature. For
10 points, name this quantity measured in pascals, the amount of force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
The Casimir effect can create a small attractive force which gives a negative value for this quantity,
and it can be measured using a Pitot tube. The negative gradient of this quantity is the force density,
and temperature is related to this quantity along a phase boundary via the Clausius-Clapeyron
equation. (*) Bernoulli's principle states that the speed of a fluid increases as this quantity decreases. GayLussac's law states that this quantity is directly proportional to temperature and Boyle's law states that it is
inversely proportional to volume. For 10 points, identify this quantity that can be measured in torr or
pascals and is defined as the force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
One non-dimensional form of this variable is equal to the equivalent ideal dry-air temperature divided by
the potential temperature; that non-dimensional form of this quantity is Exner function. In inviscid
atmosphere models, energy is conserved by setting the convective derivative of the energy density equal to
minus the divergence of the product of this value and the fluid velocity; also in such a model, the negative
gradient of this scalar function is the inhomogeneous term in the momentum equation. This quantity can be
understood as one-third the trace of the hydrostatic stress tensor because each of that tensor's diagonal
entries is quantity; this quantity is therefore the isotropic stress on an object in a static fluid. For 10 points,
name this fluid variable, one of the primitive variables of atmospherics along with temperature, fluid
velocity, and density.
ANSWER: fluid pressure [prompt on p or stress]
The Darcy-Weisbach equation describes the frictional decrease in this quantity. One form of this quantity is
given by the power flux density over c, and scales with the fourth power of temperature. The Poiseuille
equation gives the difference in this quantity in terms of flow rate and pipe radius. It is transmitted equally
in all directions throughout an incompressible fluid. Increasing the speed of a fluid decreases this quantity,
according to Bernoulli's principle. It is measured in units of torr, pascals, or standard atmospheres. For 10
points, name this physical quantity defined as force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
This quantity for gases can be measured using a McLeod gauge. This quantity for a liquid is directly
proportional to flow rate according to the Poiseuille [pwah-ZWEEZ] equation. This quantity decreases as
velocity increases according to Bernoulli's principle. Enthalpy can be defined as the internal energy plus the
product of volume and this quantity. Equal to force over area, this quantity can be measured in torrs or
pascals. For 10 points, name this quantity that is inversely related to volume in Boyle's law, and can be
measured using a barometer.
ANSWER: pressure
The Venturi effect involves a reduction of this quantity in a fluid. Bernoulli's principle states that
if fluid speed increases either potential energy or this quantity must decrease. A change in this
quantity is transmitted undiminished throughout a fluid by (*) Pascal's principle. The ideal gas law
sets the product of it and "V" equal to "n" "R" "T." For 10 points, name this quantity that equals force per
unit area and that can have units of pascals.
ANSWER: fluid pressure [accept hydraulic head until Bernoulli's principle; prompt on "P"]
For an object in a fluid, this quantity is given by the density times the acceleration of gravity
times the height of the fluid above the object. A fluid whose density is only a function of this quantity
is known as (*) barotropic. If this quantity is increased at any point in a confined fluid, there is an equal
increase at every other point in the container according to Pascal's law; Pascal also names the SI unit for
this quantity. For 10 points, identify this quantity defined as force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
This quantity is equal to minus one third times the trace of the stress tensor. The Venturi effect describes
the reduction of this quantity at a constriction. The internal energy resulting from this is called its namesake
"head." The term one-half rho v squared is added to this quantity and its gauge variety in an equation
stating that this quantity decreases as speed increases. By multiplying rho times g times the depth of a
liquid, one can find the difference between the total amount of this and the atmospheric amount. For 10
points, name this scalar with units of pascals, defined as the force divided by the area.
ANSWER: pressure
This quantity may assume a negative value when considering the cosmological constant, the Casimir effect,
and transpiration. Hydraulic devices work because a change in this quantity in one part of an incompressible
fluid is transmitted to all parts of that fluid, allowing the amplification of work, a statement known as
Pascal's principle. This quantity is often measured by a manometer and is therefore sometimes given in
millimeters of mercury, a unit equal to the torr. For 10 points, name this quantity, which is equal to n times
R times T over V by the ideal gas law and is defined as the force exerted per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
This quantity can be multiplied by volume and added to internal energy to obtain enthalpy. In a fluid, an
increase in this quantity affects the value of this quantity at every point in the container because of Pascal's
principle. The speed of a fluid and this quantity are inversely related due to Bernoulli's principle. Lines on
earth where this quantity is constant are known as isobars. Name this quantity, measured in pascals, the
amount of force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
This quantity has a negative value if the cosmological constant causes a positive vacuum energy density.
Like kinematic viscosity, the kinematic version of this quantity can be used to compute the Navier-Stokes
equation, and one law states that the change in this quantity is equal to density times gravity times the
change in height. For an ideal gas, this quantity is equal to the number of moles times temperature times the
ideal gas constant, all divided by volume. A change in this quantity in an incompressible fluid is transmitted
equally throughout the fluid according to Pascal's law. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to force
divided by unit area.
ANSWER: Pressure
When this quantity is divided by specific weight and measured in units of length, it's called its namesake
"head." Compressibility equals the partial derivative of volume with respect to this quantity, divided by
volume. One form of this quantity can be calculated as the product of fluid density, gravity, and the height
below the surface. This quantity equalizes in all locations of an incompressible fluid according to Pascal's
principle. Work done by a gas equals this quantity times its change in volume. At constant height, an
increase in fluid velocity will lead to a decrease in this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to
force over area, measured in pascals.
ANSWER: pressure [or pressure head; or gauge pressure; or hydrostatic pressure]
Fugacity is often substituted for this quantity when doing calculations with non-ideal gases. For an
incompressible fluid, this quantity is equal in all parts of the fluid according to Pascal's Principle. The
solubility of a gas in a liquid is proportional to this quantity for the gas according to Henry's Law. Charles's
Law keeps this quantity constant, and it is multiplied by volume in the ideal gas law. For 10 points, name
this quantity measured in pascals, often by a barometer.
ANSWER: pressure [or vapor pressure]
This quantity's namesake "head" is a length measurement obtained by observing this quantity's
decrease in a Venturi meter. This quantity has the same base units as energy density, and in the
formula for thermodynamic work, it is integrated with respect to volume. For a gas, it increases as
more particles (*) hit the sides of the gas's container, and for a liquid it equals fluid density times
gravitational acceleration times height and is measured in pascals. For 10 points, name this measure of
force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
One type of this quantity is equal to one over c times the time-averaged value of the electric field
crossed with the magnetic field, which gives the radiation type of this quantity. This quantity is equal
to gravity at hydrostatic equilibrium. Differences in this quantity are responsible for (*) winds.
According to Pascal's law, the difference in this quantity at two points is equal to fluid density times little
g times the height difference. For 10 points, what physical quantity is equal to force over area?
ANSWER: pressure [or radiation pressure]
Acoustic impedance is the ratio between this quantity and the product of velocity and the
surface area. One type of this quantity scales with the electron number density raised to the fivethirds
in the classical limit, but density raised to the four-thirds in the relativistic limit. Dividing
Poynting's vector by the speed of light gives another form of this quantity. The partial derivative
of this quantity with respect to density is the speed of sound squared. This scalar quantity is
defined to be the negative average of the normal stresses in a fluid. Multiplying fluid density,
gravitational acceleration, and height gives the hydrostatic form of it, which is often measured in
torr, or millimeters of mercury. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to force divided by area.
ANSWER: pressure [or radiation pressure; or hydrostatic pressure; or electron degeneracy pressure; or sound pressure]
In an isentropic flow, the gradient of the enthalpy equals the inverse of the density times the gradient in this
quantity. A form of this quantity originating from a blackbody is given by one-third times the radiation
density, and in general, a form of this quantity arising from electromagnetic interactions is given by the flux
divided by the speed of light. The derivative of temperature with respect to volume at constant entropy
equals the negative derivative of this quantity with respect to entropy at constant volume via the Maxwell
relations. This thermodynamic conjugate of volume is equally transmitted throughout a static
incompressible fluid by Pascal's principle, and is proportional to moles time temperature over volume
according to the ideal gas law. For 10 points, name this physical quantity of force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
In fluids, this quantity can be considered equivalent to energy per volume. If Bernoulli's principle is
expressed with all the terms in distance squared per time squared, this quantity is divided by density, and an
increase in this quantity has the same type of impact as an increase in energy. Integrating this with respect to
volume gives work, and a calculation of enthalpy involves multiplying this times volume and adding the
result to internal energy. This is commonly defined as force per area, and it varies inversely with volume in
the ideal gas law. Name this quantity thatcan be measured in pascals, bars, or atmospheres.
ANSWER: pressure
The second and third editions of this text contained the essay General Scholium, in which its
author dealt proclaimed that he frames no hypotheses, as well as a set of Rules of Reasoning in
Philosophy, which was followed by a list of Phenomena. Its second book fought against the
astronomical hypothesis of vortices, while the third book, On the System of the World, contained
derivations of (*) Kepler's Laws and explanations for the movements of Jupiter's Moons and comets. For
10 points, name this scientific text that also outlined theories On the Motion of Bodies, the principal work
of Isaac Newton.
ANSWER: Principia Mathematica [or Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy]
A formulation of the scientific method entitled "Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy" is included at the
beginning of the third part of this work. Although ideas from calculus appear in this work, the methods are
primarily geometrical in nature and are referred to as "fluxions". The second book, written as a rebuttal of a
theory of Descartes, contains a study of air resistance and hydrostatics, while the third book, On the System
of the World, contains a derivation of Kepler's laws. For 10 points, name this book which introduces the law
of universal gravitation and contains the author's three namesake laws, a Latin treatise on mechanics by
Isaac Newton.
ANSWER: Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica [or Mathematical Principles of Natura Philosophy]
Ernst Abbe modified the design of one of these objects named for Porro. Canada balsam is used
to bind the two parts of the one named for Nicol. Those parts are made from calcite. They can be
reflecting or refracting, the latter of which can be used to (*) diffract light. Commonly encountered
ones are are the triangular form of the shape for which they are named. For 10 points, name these devices
that can be used to decompose white light into its colored components creating a rainbow pattern.
ANSWER: prism
In geology, minerals described by this word have crystals with constant cross section. In geometry,
the lateral surface area of a "right" one of these objects is equal to the perimeter of the base times the
height. In optics, their most common use relies on the fact that the index of refraction has a slight
dependence on the wavelength of light; that phenomenon is dispersion. (*) "Rectangular" ones in
geometry have a value equal to the product of the length, height, and width. For ten points, identify these
optical devices which were used by an English scientist to demonstrate that white light contained all the
colors of the visible spectrum
ANSWER: prisms [accept prismatic]
A hypothetical method of decay for these particles involves breaking into a positron and a neutral pion and
would have a half-life on the order of 10 to the 35 years. In astronomy, these particles are employed in a
namesake chain located in the core's of stars in order to synthesis lighter elements. Particles of this type are
typically composed of two up quarks and a single down quark and these particles make up about 90% of all
cosmic rays. Discovered by Ernest Rutherford, for 10 points, identify this subatomic particles that
contributes the positive charge of an atom's nucleus.
ANSWER: Proton
These particles have a half life of over ten to the thirty two years. Along with an anti-neutrino and an
electron, these particles are a product of minus beta decay. They are the main particle accelerated in
experiments at the Large Hadron Collider. The fusion of two of these in the sun is its namesake chain
reaction. They consist of two up quarks and one down quark, giving it a positive charge. For 10 points,
name
these subatomic particles that along with neutrons reside in the nucleus.
ANSWER: protons
On a standard nuclide chart, the drip line for these objects is the closest drip line to the "A equals Z" line.
This thing combined with a lighter thing during cosmological recombination. Most cosmic rays are these
things, which are the stablest baryons, and which are about 1836 times heavier than the heaviest firstgeneration lepton. Unsuccessful experimental efforts to observe the decay of this particle have included
Super-Kamiokande. A "chain" reaction named for these particles generates most of the sun's energy. The
number of these in an atom is typically denoted "Z" and is called the atomic number. For 10 points, name
this positively-charged nuclear particle.
ANSWER: protons [or hydrogen-1 nuclei; or protium nuclei; prompt on "hydrogen"]
One of these particle is posited to decay into an antimuon and a neutral pion in over 10 to the 33
years. A recent controversy from the Paul Scherrer Institute showed that their charge radius is much
smaller than anticipated. About 90% of cosmic rays are composed of these particles. This particle
consists of two up (*) quarks and one down quark and determines the atomic number of an element. For 10
points name this positively charged particle found in the atomic nucleus alongside the neutron.
ANSWER: proton
This particle's "spin crisis" is still unresolved. Even though it accidentally helped discover neutrinos, the
Super-Kamiokande detector was initially intended to study a phenomenon involving this particle. These
specific particles- interactions with the CMBR lead to the GZK cutoff. Many GUTs put this particle's halflife when free at about 10 to the 36th years, though its decay has never been observed. This baryon is
composed of two up quarks and a down quark, and it is the most common constituent of a cosmic ray. A
positron orbits this particle's anti-particle in antihydrogen. For 10 points, identify this positively charged
particle found alongside neutrons in atomic nuclei.
ANSWER: protons [prompt on cosmic rays]
Experiments at Super-Kamiokande have attempted to study the decay of this particle, but it has not
been observed due to its extreme stability. It is accelerated alone in the LHC, and along with its
antiparticle in the Tevatron. (*) Cosmic rays are primarily this particle that contains one down quark and
two up quarks, and their quantity determines atomic number. For 10 points, name this positively-charged
particle found in atomic nuclei.
ANSWER: proton
These particles collide with their own antiparticles in an accelerator which detected the top quark at
Fermilab. They are emitted along with carbon-14 when cosmic rays strike nitrogen nuclei in the atmosphere,
and they can be used toelucidate chemical structures in their namesake type of NMR. They are converted
into a particle with nearly thesame mass while emitting a neutrino in a form of beta decay called electron
capture. They are composed of two up quarks and a down quark. Equivalent to an H+ ion, for 10 points,
name this particle with mass of 1 amu and chargeof +1, which resides in the nucleus alongside the neutron.
ANSWER: proton [accept antiproton on the first sentence]
Alone, it is estimated that this particle has a half life of about 10 to the 34th years, though it will react
immediately with the electron cloud of any available molecule. A namesake "chain" in stellar fusion
begins when two of these combine to form deuterium and release a positron. A (*) hydronium ion is a
molecule of water with an extra one of these particles. It consists of two up quarks and one down quark and
may be referred to as H+ in chemistry. For 10 points, name this subatomic particle which is present with
neutrons in the nuclei of atoms.
ANSWER: protons [accept hydrogen nuclei]
This particle is theoretically predicted to decay into a neutral pion and a positron, but this has never been
experimentally observed; however, it can undergo the inverse beta decay by capturing an electron. They
make up 90% of cosmic rays and contain two up quarks and one down quark, which makes them lighter
than the other particle that, with it, makes up the alpha particle. Also known as the hydrogen ion, its number
in an element is the atomic number. For 10 points, identify this particle that is found in the nucleus and
makes up the atom along with neutrons and electrons.
ANSWER: protons
AADH was used to show that short range motions in enzymes are important to the tunneling of these
particles, while in carbonic anhydrase, the His-64 residue participates in a reaction that results in the
transfer of one of these objects from a molecule coordinated to a zinc atom. The Q cycle results in the
tranlocation of these particles across the mitochondrial membrane. In stars less massive than the sun, the
predominant fusion reaction sees 6 of these objects participate in a chain reaction to yield a helium nuclide.
In the Bronsted-Lowry theory, acids are molecules which are able to donate one of these particles. For 10
points, identify these particles, the nuclear counterparts of neutrons which have a +1 charge.
ANSWER: proton [prompt on hydrogen; accept "proton tunneling" or "quantum tunneling" until tunneling]
The existence of this particle was first proposed by William Prout. According to the standard model,
this particle's status as the lightest baryon should make it stable. That hypothesis is supported by
estimates for its lifetime, which range from ten to the twenty-nine to ten to the thirty-six years. The
strong force overcomes the (*) repulsion between these particles in the location where they are most
commonly found. Ernest Rutherford proved the existence of this particle, which is composed of two up
quarks and a down quark. The process of electron capture can turn one of these particles into a neutron. For
10 points, name this positively charged elementary particle found in atomic nuclei.
ANSWER: proton
This particle can hypothetically decay to a positron and neutral pion with a mean lifetime of ten to the 33rd
years. It is a hadron composed of two up quarks and one down quark and is often found in plasmas and
cosmic rays. pH can be thought of as a measure of the concentration of this particle. The number of these
particles in a nucleus is equal to the atomic number of an element. For 10 points, name this particle that has
a charge of plus one and weighs approximately one atomic mass unit.
ANSWER: protons
It is hypothesized that one of them would decay into a pion and a positron, though this would take over ten
to the thirty years. Stars fuse hydrogen into helium by the chain reaction named after these, and these
baryons have two up quarks and one down quark. An alpha particle has two of them and their amount in a
particle can be symbolized Z. Have a charge of one point six times ten to the negative nineteen coulombs,
these are what positively charged particles found in an atom's nucleus.
ANSWER: proton [prompt on H+]
The Grotthuss mechanism explains how this particle can move quickly in aqueous solutions, called this
particle's "mobility". This particle is predicted to decay in ten to the thirty six years, and the simplest form
of NMR spectroscopy is named for this particle. The existence of this charged particle was shown by
Rutherford's gold foil experiment. The Bronsted-Lowry definition of an acid is a molecule's ability to
donate one of these particles. For 10 points, identify this positively charged particle found in the nucleus.
ANSWER: proton [or protium; or H+; or positively charged hydrogen; prompt on hydrogen]
Grand unified theories have typically predicted the decay of these into a pion and a positron, but
experiments estimate that their theoretical minimum half-life is on the order of 10 to the 36 years. They
were discovered when Ernest Rutherford's scintillation detectors saw their signature after he shot alpha
particles into nitrogen atoms, and they can be created by beta decay. They are composed of two up and one
down quark, have spin of one half, and after electron capture they transform into another baryon. FTP,
name this positively-charged nucleon that determines elements' atomic number.
ANSWER: protons
Its antiparticle was first discovered by Chamberlain and Segre, and the Tevatron is used to accelerate these
particles to relativistic speeds. Grand unified theories have predicted that this particle has a half-life of ten
to the thirty second years, although its decay has never been observed. Hydrogen is used in its namesake
NMR spectroscopy, and they are composed of a down quark and two up quarks. These particles are bound
together by the strong nuclear force, and the atomic number denotes the number of these in an atom. For 10
points, name these positively charged particles in the nucleus.
ANSWER: Protons
The radiative decay of this particle has a half-life on the order of at least ten to the thirty-five years. A
technique in analytical chemistry measures the precession of the magnetic moments of nuclei
(NOO-clay-eye) with an odd number of these particles, which is a type of NMR. This particle is composed
of two up quarks and one down quark. Two of these particles and two neutrons comprise an alpha particle.
For 10 points, name this first-generation hadron which is equivalent to the H-plus ion and is the positively
charged component of an atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: proton
Spin-spin coupling and chemical shift are observed in a phenomenon that takes advantage of the
half-spin of these particles, a namesake form of NMR. The function of ATP synthase requires the
movement of these particles through a "pump." An extra one belonging to a molecule of water results in a
hydronium ion. The letter Z represents the number of these particles in a single atom; in several isotopes of
one atom, the number of these particles stays the same. For 10 points, identify this positive particle found in
the nucleus.
ANSWER: protons
These are the smallest particles for which TMS is used to calibrate their namesake type of NMR
spectroscopy. The Standard Model explains why these particles when free will not decay through the
conservation of baryon number. These particles make up about 90 percent of all cosmic rays. These
baryons are composed of two (*) up quarks and one down quark. For 10 points, identify these positively
charged particles, found with neutrons in the atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: protons
The meson was originally proposed as a particle that mediates interactions between two of these particles.
An attempt to study the decay of these particles has taken place as part of the neutrino detection experiment
at Super-Kamiokande [kam-ee-oh-KAN-day], and beams of these particles are collided in the Large Hadron
[HAY-drahn] Collider in the search for new particles. These are the main component of cosmic rays, and,
like the nucleus, their discovery is credited to Ernest Rutherford, who bombarded nitrogen with alpha
particles. These baryons [BAIR-eeahnz] that consist of two up and one down quarks exhibit electric charge.
Name these particles equivalent to hydrogen-1 nuclei that combine with neutrons in the strong nuclear force
and whose charge is the opposite of an electron's.
ANSWER: protons [accept hydrogen ion or hydrogen-1 nucleus until "hydrogen-1"; prompt on hydrogen]
The second branch of an energy reaction named for this particle involves lithium burning. This
particle is believed to decay into a positron and neutral pion and has an estimated half-life of ten to
the thirty-six years. The energy reaction named for this particle produces most of the Sun's energy.
Composed of two up (*) quarks and one down quark, this particle is the most massive particle produced by
beta decay. For 10 points, name this positively charged particle found in the nucleus.
ANSWER: proton
The value for the radius of this particle is the subject of intense debate after experiments pairing it
with a muon gave a much-lower-than-expected value. The delta plus baryon, which has spin 3/2, is
its high-energy equivalent. Grand unified theories that don-t conserve baryon number symmetry
allow this particle to decay into a neutral pion and positron, but attempts to observe this decay have
only succeeded in setting the half-life to at least 10 to the (*) 34 years. A cycle named for these particles
that doesn-t require carbon, nitrogen, or oxygen as catalysts dominates in stars around 1 solar mass; that
fusion cycle is named for a "chain" of these particles and produces helium. This baryon is composed of 2 up
quarks and 1 down quark. For 10 points, name this nucleon with a positive charge.
ANSWER: protons [do NOT accept "hydrogen"]
This particle corresponds to the "plus one-half" eigenvalue of the z-component of the isospin, and the
dominant decay mode of the neutral lambda is into a negative pion and this particle. This particle can be
found at the intersection of the S equals 0 and Q equals 1 lines of the baryon octet. Stackelberg proposed
the conservation of baryon number to account for the stability of this particle, whose lifetime is currently
figured to be at least 10 to the 34th power years. Predicted to decay in some grand unified theories, this
particle accounts for the majority of the composition of cosmic rays, and can transform into a heavier
baryon by capturing an electron. Consisting of two up quarks and a down quark, for 10 points, identify this
subatomic particle, the nucleonic partner of the neutron.
ANSWER: proton
These objects include a variable subclass whose members increase up to 6 magnitudes in brightness; that
subclass is named for the prototype FU Orionis, while another subclass consists of the Herbig Ae/Be
objects. They evolve from deeply embedded Class 0 ["zero"] sources which have material infalling from
the original molecular cloud core onto the surrounding accretion disk. At the low mass end they include the
T Tauri stars, which evolve into spectral types G, K and M. For 10 points, name these objects that,
depending on their mass, evolve along the Henyey and/or Hayashi tracks towards a major feature on the HR
diagram.
ANSWER: young stellar objects [or YSOs; or pre-main sequence stars or objects; or PMS stars or objects; accept T Tauri stars or objects before "Herbig Ae/Be objects"; accept protostars, baby stars, etc.]
NGC 7538, near the Bubble Nebula, is the largest example of one of these objects discovered, and a
rapid increase in accretion in these objects causes FU Orionis variability. The virial theorem is used
to derive the Jeans criterion for the formation of these entities, which are formed after turbulent
fragmentation of a giant molecular cloud. Hydrostatic constraints cause these objects to follow the
Hayashi Track. These entities can undergo mass loss via supersonic jets and form (*) Herbig-Haro
objects. It is believed that lithium burning powers their T Tauri variability. When above the Jeans Mass but
below 0.072 solar masses, these objects will never progress to the main sequence, instead becoming brown
dwarves. For 10 points, name this type of pre main sequence star.
ANSWER: Protostar [prompt on star]
This man chronologically listed rulers from Nabonassar to Antoninus Pius in his Canon of Kings. This
namesake of an open cluster in the tail of Scorpius collected his writings on astrology in his Tetrabiblos
and mapped a world spanning from the Fortunate Islands to Serica in his Geographia. His best-known
work contains a table of chords and posits a geocentric universe. For 10 points, name this author of the
Almagest, an early Alexandrian astronomer.
ANSWER: Claudius Ptolemy [or Claudius Ptolemaeus]
In a "differential" setup named for these objects, two of them exert opposite and unequal torques on a
third. The acceleration in another system with one of these objects at its apex is proportional to the
difference of two masses divided by their sum. Their mechanical advantage increases as more of them are
used at once. An idealized Atwood machine contains two weights, a string, and a massless one of these
objects, which are used in a block and tackle to lift objects. For 10 points, name this simple machine that
consists of a wheel with a rope over it.
ANSWER: pulley
Though not pendulums, a dynamical system of two of these machines, in which one mass is free to swing in
a plane and a larger mass moves only up or down, exhibits chaotic or complex harmonic motion. In a
system of two of these machines, for two masses x and y, the acceleration experienced by both masses is x
minus y over x plus y, all times little-g. An Atwood machine has two ideal, frictionless examples of these
machines, which are connected in a block and tackle. For 10 points, name these machines, exemplified by a
wheel around which a rope moves.
ANSWER: pulleys [accept Atwood's machines before mentioned]
A nearly massless one of these objects is used to hold the weights for an Atwood machine. One mass
pulls another across a table using the horizontal version of this device. A single fixed-axis one has a
mechanical advantage of 1, while adding more of them will often increase the mechanical advantage if
friction is ignored. For 10 points, name this simple machine that uses an axle and a rope to lift objects.
ANSWER: pulley [or sheave]
Though not pendulums, a dynamical system of two of these machines, in which one mass is free to swing in
a plane and a larger mass moves only up or down, exhibits chaotic or complex harmonic motion. In a
system of two of these machines, for two masses x and y, the acceleration experienced by both masses is x
minus y over x plus y, all times little-g. An Atwood machine has two ideal, frictionless examples of these
machines, which are connected in a block and tackle. For 10 points, name these machines, exemplified by a
wheel around which a rope moves.
ANSWER: pulleys [accept Atwood's machines before mentioned]
An Atwood's Machine involves a frictionless and massless one of these devices, and students are often
asked to calculate the tension on the objects on either side of these. Van de Graaff generators create
positive charge by running a belt through a metal and a plastic one of these, and the mechanical advantage
of an ideal block and tackle system is equal to the number of these objects in the system. For 10 points,
name this simple machine used to lift heavy masses, which is made by wrapping a string around a wheel.
ANSWER: Pulleys
T. A. Weston's differential type of this device relies on two unequal radii, and little g can be measured by
the motion of two masses about one of these in an Atwood machine. The movable type of this device has
twice the mechanical advantage of the fixed type, and a system of multiple ones is known as a block and
tackle. Precise calculations need to account for the moment of inertia and friction of their sheaves. Often
used to transmit rotational motion between shafts, name this simple machine that makes lifting easier by
accommodating a belt, chain, or rope through its outer groove.
ANSWER: pulleys
Thomas Aldridge Weston designed the differential type of this device, which is similar to a windlass
and has a mechanical advantage of at least two. Two masses and one of these devices are used to
demonstrate constant acceleration in an Atwood machine. These items allow the tensions on opposite
ends of a string to not go in opposite directions, and a block and tackle is made of several of them.
In order to simplify calculations, these items are often assumed to be massless and frictionless. Name
these simple machines that consist of wheels with strings running over them.
ANSWER: pulleys [prompt on simple machines]
There are currently three classes of these objects recognized by astronomers, one in which the decay of an
extremely strong magnetic field generates electromagnetic energy.. The first of these were observed by
Jocelyn Bell, and magnataurs are another notable class of these objects. For some of these objects, the
regularity of their emission of radiation is as precise as an atomic clock. The millisecond variety of these
objects has allowed scientists to test general relativity in an intense magnetic field. After their formation
during supernovae, they burn themselves out in about 50 million years, ceasing to spin before becoming
neutron stars. FTP, name this class of rapidly rotating neutron stars which emit electromagnetic radiation at
regular intervals.
ANSWER: pulsars
The line-of-sight integral of electron column density to one of these objects is their "dispersion measure,"
and socalled "timing experiments" done with these objects are employed to detect the Gravitational Wave
Background. One of these objects was the first known star save the Sun to possess planets. Turbulence in
the interstellar medium is commonly probed using the radiation from these objects. One class of these
objects is thought to originate from two mechanisms, one of which is the "spin-up" of low-mass X-ray
binaries, the "millisecond" variety. Another class of them rotates due to the decay of a powerful B-field.
Starquakes are thought to cause glitches in the periods of these objects. For 10 points, name this class of
neutron stars that emits electromagnetic radiation.
ANSWER: pulsars [prompt on neutron stars]
Observations of these objects are used to probe the free electron density of the universe. They eventually
reach the death line or death valley, and a binary system consisting of two of these objects was discovered
by Hulse and Taylor. They sometimes experience sudden increases in frequency known as glitches. They
can be powered by accretion or rotation, and highly magnetized ones are known as magnetars. These stars-
emissions and precisely periodic rotation result in a "lighthouse effect." For 10 points, name these rapidly
rotating neutron stars that emit a beam of radiation.
ANSWER: pulsars [prompt on "neutron stars" before it is mentioned]
The amount of dispersion in these objects is related to the quantity of free electrons between them
and earth, providing information about the warm ionized medium. The central object of the Crab nebula
is one of these. Thomas Gold was the first to correctly classify these objects, which were dubbed "LGMs"
by Hewish and Bell, who thought they were signals from extraterrestrials. The "lighthouse model"
describes, for 10 points, these rapidly rotating neutron stars named for their periodically emitted
radiation.
ANSWER: pulsars
In 2006, a Los Alamos team released a series of predictions of these objects- glitches, and a
"millisecond" variety is believed to result from X-ray binaries. The first extra-solar planets were found
orbiting one of them, and Franco Pacini helped Thomas Gold put forth the first definition of them. The
radiation from these objects travels through the interstellar medium, and one form of them produces
radiation purely from accretion. Also consisting of a "rotation-powered" variety and magnetars, for 10
points, name this class of quickly rotating neutron stars.
ANSWER: pulsars [or pulsating stars]
These objects possess a magnetic field whose axis of symmetry is offset from the rotation axis, giving rise
to the lighthouse effect. In these objects, the decay of an extraordinarily strong magnetic field can provide
energy, in which case these stars are called magnetars. These stars can derive their energy from the
gravitational energy of accreted matter, as is the case for one of these objects at the center of the Crab
Nebula. These objects were first discovered by Hewish and Bell and were initially termed Little Green Men.
For 10 points, name these rapidly spinning neutron stars which emit radiation unevenly, resulting in a
characteristic flash.
ANSWER: Pulsars
The "black widow" one of these structures is slowly destroying its binary companion. When one of
these objects loses energy, then quickly regains energy as it is spun up by accretion of gas from a
neighboring object, a "recycled" type of these objects is formed. One source of evidence for the
existence of gravitational waves is the 1913+16 or Hulse-Taylor binary one of these objects. (*)
"Glitches" in them cause changes in the frequency of their emitted radiation, anomalies in which can be
used to detect exoplanets. The Vela Nebula and Crab Nebula contain one of these stars in the center which
emits X-rays. Jocelyn Bell Burnell discovered these stars by observing a radio source which blinked on and
off at a constant frequency. For 10 points, name these rotating neutron stars which emit radiation from their
magnetic poles.
ANSWER: pulsars [prompt on neutron stars, prompt on "binary systems" before mention]
The first extrasolar planet to be definitively confirmed was found orbiting one of these objects by Alexander
Wolszczan. One subclass of them is also known as the "recycled" type, and the Hulse-Taylor binary one
provided the first observational evidence of gravity waves. Roche lobe overflow leads to the accretionpowered ones that emit x-rays, while the decay of a strong magnetic field powers the magnetar class.
Glitches can occur in the originally discovered type of these objects, whose misalignment of rotation and
magnetic axes is responsible for their most prominent feature. For 10 points, name these rotating neutron
stars that regularly emit radiation.
ANSWER: pulsars
The lighthouse model describes the misalignment of the axes of these entities. One of these objects forms
the center of the Crab Nebula and serves as the source of its synchotron radiation. A subclass of these
without a companion star and powered by magnetic field decay is called the magnetar. These objects
discovered by Anthony Hewish and his student Jocelyn Bell are a subset of neutron stars and were
originally dubbed "Little Green Men." Originally hypothesized to be rapidly-spinning neturon stars, for 10
points, name these ultra-dense spinning balls which regularly emit radiation as they spin.
ANSWER: pulsars [prompt on neutron star]
Recent findings that young versions of these have glitches has led to hypotheses that they have surface
quakes or that their superfluid interior interacts with their crust. A plerion is a nebula that gains energy from
the wind of these objects, and the best known plerion is the Crab Nebula. Many of the ones that have been
discovered recently emit only gamma rays, and a small number of known examples emit only X-rays. First
explained by Thomas Gold and Franco Pacini in 1968, these were discovered a year earlier by Jocelyn Bell
Burnell and Antony Hewish. They are remnants of supernovas and explained by the conservation of angular
momentum. Name these neutron stars that emit radiation that is detected in short periods due to their
rotation.
ANSWER: pulsars [prompt on neutron stars]
When the magnetosphere radius exceeds the Keplerian co-rotation radius for these objects, the "propeller"
effect occurs. Those that can be detected lie to the left of a "death line" on P-Pdot diagrams. The Vela and
Crab ones of these objects are associated with supernova remnants. An unusual one of these objects that
emits almost solely gamma rays is Geminga. Sudden frequency jumps in these objects are known as
"glitches." Indirect evidence of gravity waves is given by the observation of the Hulse-Taylor binary one of
these objects. These objects were discovered when an astronomer noticed a "bit of scruff" in data, which
was published in a 1968 Nature paper by Antony Hewish and Jocelyn Bell. For 10 points, identify these
highly magnetized, rotating neutron stars.
ANSWER: radio pulsars [prompt on neutron stars or magnetars]
These objects undergo a phenomenon known as folding, and data collected from one of these
objects was initially thought to be a "glitch" due to a "starquake." Those that emit X-rays are
thought to have formed when the more massive star in a binary system underwent a supernova and
formed a (*) "normal" type of this kind of star. They were discovered by Anthony Hewish and Jocelyn Bell
in 1968 using a radio telescope, and initially dubbed "little green men". For 10 points, name these rotating
neutron stars, known for emitting periodic pulses of radio waves.
ANSWER: pulsars
The Tempo program is used to find and model these objects, which are sometimes surrounded by a
plerion. An example of these objects in Virgo is surrounded by the first discovered extrasolar planets.
A binary example of them was used to indirectly prove the existence of (*) gravitational waves by
Hulse and Taylor. Burnell and Hewish named the first discovered one LGM-1 and noted that its emissions
were periodic. For 10 points, name these highly magnetized rotating stars that periodically emit radiation.
ANSWER: pulsars [or pulsating stars; prompt on neutron stars]
Self-sustaining plasmas require a factor denoted by this letter to be infinite, and a rotometer
measures another quantity denoted by this letter. In addition to the fusion energy gain factor and
volumetric flow rate, this letter denotes a quantity which is divided by mass to find its "latent" version,
and the Lorentz force is found by multiplying another quantity denoted by this letter by the cross
product of velocity and magnetic field. For 10 points, name this letter of the alphabet which is
commonly used to represent heat and charge.
ANSWER: q
In the chiral limit, the Nambu-Jona-Lasinio Model can be seen as a phenomenological version of this
theory, and one version of it was formulated using an invariant equal to the trace of a path-ordered
exponential known as the Wilson loop, and is referred to as the "lattice" variety. Another version relies on
a series of factorization theorems, called the "perturbative" variety. The Gell-Mann matrices are the
infinitesimal generators of the SU(3) group, which is central to this theory, and Gross, Politzer, and Wilczek
derived one feature of this theory, which states that particle interactions will become weak at shorter
distances, known as asymptotic freedom. FTP, name this theory that explains the strong force in terms of
quarks, gluons, and color charge.
ANSWER: QCD or Quantum Chromodynamics
One of this theory's properties is characterized by the area law of the Wilson loop and the zero
average of the Polyakov line. Another property associated with the decrease of the effecting coupling
constant at shorting distances is known as (*) asymptotic freedom. This theory is based on the SU(3)
gauge group and employs the Yang-Mills field theory. It deals with particles that carry a form of charge
called color, such as mesons, quarks, and protons. For 10 points, name this theory based on force carrying
particles called gluons, which describes the behavior of the strong force.
ANSWER: QCD (or quantum chromodynamics)
Drag modeled by this function of velocity arises from the energy need to move the medium, and is not
analytically solvable in general. Potential energy extrema are all locally approximated by this type of
function. The power dissipated by a resistor equals resistance times this function of current. This type of
function is the potential of a system which is used to model diatomic molecules as harmonic oscillators. The
denominator of the expression for gravitational force contains this function of distance. An object moving in
uniform gravity follows this type of trajectory. For 10 points, identify this function, which is applied to
velocity in the expression for kinetic energy.
ANSWER: quadratic [or word forms; or parabolic or word forms; accept x squared; accept x to the second power (or "n" or anything instead of "x" in that answer); prompt on "polynomial"]
This process cannot be consistently used on all polynomials in the classical position and
momenta on the symplectic manifold R two n according to the "no-go" theorem of Groenewold,
which was later expanded by van Hove. In the "first" type of this process, classical particles are
assigned wave amplitudes. This process translates states that are points in a phase space into
vectors on a Hilbert space and observables that are complex-valued functions on the phase space
to bounded linear operators, such as is done by the Weyl transform. If a single magnetic
monopole exists, then electric charge must have this property according to the Dirac condition
named for it. For 10 points, name this process by which a quantum field theory is constructed
from a classical field theory.
ANSWER: quantization
They can form from 3D islands generated during Stranski-Krastanov growth of strained systems.
When they are in the Coulomb blockade region (*) tunneling in and out of these structures is prevented.
Their optically excited form produces bound electron-hole pairs and weak lateral confinement causes their
exciton binding energy to exceed their confinement energy. For 10 points, name these device that could
potentially function in qubits and are also known as a nanocrystal semiconductor.
ANSWER: quantum dot (accept nanocrystal semiconductor before mentioned)
This theory predicts the existence of both a u-channel diagram and t-channel diagram in Moller
scattering. Its gauge group is isomorphic to the circle group, and the use of renormalization to
remove divergences in this theory was formulated by Dyson, who also showed the equivalence of its
operator and diagram forms. Precision tests of it involve checking the correlation between
independent calculations of the fine structure constant, and this theory is used to explain the deviation
of the electron's magnetic moment from 2. It predicts virtual electron-positron pair production as the
source of vacuum polarization, and one-loop effects in it give rise to the Lamb shift. Charged particles
exchange photons in, for 10 points, name this extremely accurate abelian gauge theory developed by
Schwinger, Tomonaga, and Feynman.
ANSWER: Quantum Electrodynamics or QED
Applying a Hadamard gate followed by a CNOT gate causes the control and target bits to have this
property. In quantum teleportation, the parties start with qubits with this property. For two state
systems, a state maximal for this property is 1-over-Sqrt[2] ket-00 + 1-over-Sqrt[2] ket-11, which can be used
to violate the CHSH inequality as well as (*) Bell's inequality. The EPR paradox was about this
property's supposed violation of locality. If the state of two systems cannot be decomposed into a product
of individual states, then those systems have this property. For 10 points, name this property of quantum
systems in which the states of subsystems are correlated, which Einstein derided as "spooky action at a
distance."
ANSWER: quantum entanglement
Walborn et. al demonstrated in a 2002 paper that this phenomenon appears independent of when the
observer detects it, and Popescu and Rohrlich wrote about the "Joy" of this phenomenon. Another scientist
who described it as "spooky" introduced hidden variables to account for it, although Bell's theorem proves
that hidden variables cannot adequately explain it. It leads to the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox because
it violates locality, allowing for information to travel faster than the speed of light. This idea is behind
qubits, the basic unit of information in quantum computers. For 10 points, what phenomenon describes
multiple particles which share linked quantum states?
ANSWER: quantum entanglement
A 2014 experiment conducted by Gabriela Barreto Lemos used this phenomenon to create images of cats. It
occurs when one of the eigenvalues of the joint density matrix's partial transpose is negative, a criterion
named for Peres and Horodecki. The entropy of this phenomenon is given by the Von Neumann entropy for
one of its reduced density matrices. The CHSH inequality can be used to prove a theorem holding that the
effects of this phenomenon cannot be explained by local hidden variable theories, because it violates Bell's
inequality. A thought experiment using this phenomenon led to the conclusion that quantum mechanics is an
incomplete theory, according to the EPR paradox. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which the states
of two spatially separated particles are intrinsically related.
ANSWER: quantum entanglement [prompt on "spooky action at a distance"]
A property sometimes considered a quantum field theory analogue of this phenomenon is the ReehSchlieder property and states that in an arbitrarily small neighborhood, the vacuum can generate any state
vector of the field. This phenomenon occurs when any of the eigenvalues of a state's partial transposition
are negative according to the Peres-Horodecki criterion. States in which this phenomenon is at a maximum
are superpositions of eigenstates of the particles involved and are named for Bell. This phenomenon was
first considered in a paper which suggested that quantum events were determined by hidden parameters. It
occurs when two or more spatially separated particles are still in interdependent states. For 10 points,
identify this quantum mechanical "spooky action at a distance" that allows for teleportation of information.
ANSWER: quantum entanglement
One method of generating this kind of state is required for superdense coding, and is done by
separating out systems with bias either over or under pi over four; that method is named for
Procrustes. A state has this property if and only if its Schmidt rank is greater than one. This
phenomenon was verified in an experiment using optical Stern-Gerlach filters and a radiative
calcium source by Alain Aspect. This property is (*) maximal for Bell pairs. Bell also names a theorem
that implies that this phenomenon is real or local realism is violated. This phenomenon was originally
considered in a thought experiment that led to the EPR paradox. For 10 points, name this "spooky"
phenomenon in which separated particles can have correlated properties, like spin.
ANSWER: quantum entanglement (accept word forms)
One form of this phenomenon can be modeled with a hierarchical model developed by Haldane and
Haperin. When plotted against the chemical potential and another value, the integer version of it colors
Hofstadter's Butterfly. Dan Tsui and Horst Stromer won a Nobel Prize for analyzing a variant of this where
multiple particles are in motion. The fractional form produces narrower plateaus than the integer form, the
latter of which involves Chern numbers. As a result of this effect, discovered in the inversion layer of a
MOSFET by Klaus von Klitzing, the elementary charge, filling factor and Planck's constant determine its
namesake's conductivity. For 10 points, name this effect from physics, whose classical analog describes the
perpendicular voltage generated by applying an electric current perpendicular to a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Quantum Hall Effect
This model's energy is added to the energy of the rigid rotor to model rovibrionic coupling, and
using an exponential Morse potential with this system gives more accurate results in IR spectroscopy.
Taking the higher-order terms of the Taylor expansion of the potential of this system allows for
modeling anharmonic effects, and this system's wavefunction contains a Hermite polynomial. The
energy levels of this system are proportional to the (*) quantum number plus one half. Diatomic
molecules are commonly modeled using this system, whose energy levels are evenly spaced and whose
potential is a parabola given by Hooke's Law. For 10 points, name this simple quantum system that is an
analog of the classical masses connected by a spring.
ANSWER: quantum harmonic oscillator [or QHO; accept quantum harmonic oscillator after "quantum" is read]
For a constant magnetic field, the energy of the anomalous Zeeman effect is proportional to a function of
these values known as the Lande g-factor. In any system, there is one of these for each operator that
commutes with the Hamiltonian and one given by the Hamiltonian's eigenvalues. The radius of electron
orbitals in the Bohr model is proportional to that value squared, and they are constant as additional
electrons are added according to the Aufbau principle. No two fermions can have the same value for these
according to the Pauli exclusion principle. For 10 points, name these values, which describe among other
things the shell, subshell, and spin values for an electron.
ANSWER: quantum numbers [accept angular momentum quantum numbers before "Hamiltonian"]
The elementary model of the hydrogen atom under this theory describes the electric field using a
classical Coulomb potential. The infinite potential well is extended to the finite potential well as a
simple problem under this theory. The mathematical base of this theory was formulated by Paul
Dirac who used mathematical objects called (*) Spinors. Laws and paradoxes derived from this theory
include the paradox of Schrodinger's cat, wave-particle duality and Planck's law. The controversies arising
from the theory lead to the Bohr-Einstein debates and EPR experiment, and the Copenhagen interpretation
was derived to explain this theory's implications. For 10 points, name this theory which provides a
description of the motion of particles at the atomic and subatomic level.
ANSWER: Quantum physics (or Quantum theory, Quantum mechanics)
According to the adiabatic approximation, the probability of these events tends to zero for arbitrarily slowly
varying perturbations. For a general perturbation, the probability of one of these events taking places can be
calculated using Fermi's golden rule. These cannot occur in atomic systems between states of identical
parity according to Laporte's rule, and in general these events are restricted to particular quantum numbers
by selection rules. The energy absorbed or released by one of these events can be calculated for hydrogen
from Rydberg's formula. For 10 points, identify these events which occur when an electron absorbs or emits
a photon and thereby changes its quantum state.
ANSWER: quantum state transitions
Experiments by Nimtz have confirmed a controversial result related to the formalism for this phenomenon
developed by Hartman in response to the discovery that the duration of this phenomenon is independent of
width, implying that it could occur faster than light, determined by Eisenbud and Wigner. Resulting in a
region of negative differential resistance, this effect is exploited by Esaki diodes, and under certain
conditions, it occurs with unity probability in the Ramsauer-Townsend effect. The Fowler-Nordheim type
refers to when electrons do it in the presence of a strong electric field, also called cold emission, which is
applied by a certain kind of microscope. This phenomenon was first applied to the process of alpha decay
by Gamow. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which a particle trapped in a potential well with
walls higher than its own kinetic energy manages to escape anyway.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
The coupling of evanescent fields is often analogized to this phenomenon. False vacuums decay via this
phenomenon to form bubbles in cosmic inflation. This phenomenon was first discovered when complex
discrete eigenvalue solutions to the Schrodinger equation were found by George Gamow, who was
studying alpha decay. A diode that exhibits negative resistance works as a result of this phenomenon, a fact
first discovered by Leo Esaki. A conducting probe is held extremely close to a sample in order to image at
the atomic level in a type of scanning microscope that uses this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a particle penetrates a potential barrier even though it lacks the energy to do so.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
Thermionic emission was explained as acting through this phenomenon by Fowler and Nordheim. A WKB
approximation in the case that the classical momentum is imaginary can be used to show that the spatial
wave function decays exponentially in some regions due to this phenomenon. Oscar Klein described a
counterintuitive result in which an increase in potential increases the rate of this phenomenon, and George
Gamow discovered the role of this phenomenon in alpha decay. Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer used this
phenomenon to develop a type of microscope which utilizes an electrically conductive metal tip and a
voltage bias to measure the current of electrons between the tip and the surface. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon that allows particles to "jump" over a barrier, an impossibility in classical physics.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
A very similar phenomenon to this in optics is known as frustrated total internal reflection. A 2006 paper
showed that enzymes make use of this process, which is also the basis of operation for the Esaki diode.
Nuclear reactions depend upon this process to overcome the Coulomb repulsion between nuclei, and the
resonant form of this phenomenon, which exponentially depends on energy and distance, occurs when
electrons have energies in the conduction band. Cooper pairs undergo this process in a Josephson junction
to allow a current to flow through an insulator. For 10 points, name this quantum effect in which a particle
travels through a classically forbidden barrier.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
A resonant form of this phenomenon generates a quasi-local state in which a certain quantity is equal
to 1 when the total energy equals the bound-state energy. One formalism describing this phenomenon
produces a solution equal to a constant times momentum raised to the minus one-half power times
the exponential of i over h-bar times the position integral of momentum. That formalism uses an Airy
function to patch together two solutions at a turning point. Binnig and Rohrer developed a device
that uses this phenomenon and a (*) scanning probe to perform nanoimaging. This phenomenon is
associated with a transition from oscillatory to exponential solutions of the Schrodinger equation. For 10
points, name this process in which a particle passes through a classically forbidden region, crossing a
potential barrier higher than its total energy.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling [in case anyone is curious: the formalism is the WKB approximation and the device is the scanning tunneling microscope]
In Yang-Mills theories, BPST instantons are solutions for this phenomenon between two vacua of
different Chern-Simons numbers. Field emission of electrons is explained by this phenomenon. e to
the negative two over h-bar times integral between two points of root two m times quantity V of x
minus E, dx is the derived probability for this phenomenon when using the WKB approximation. A
diode that operates via this phenomenon was created by Leo Esaki. Fusion occurs via this process in the
Gamow window because nuclei don't have to overcome the Coulomb barrier. For 10 points, name this
classically forbidden phenomenon in which a particle passes through a potential barrier even though its
energy is less than the barrier's.
ANSWER: quantum mechanical tunneling
Using the Kinetic Isotope effect, this process was shown to catalyze hydrogen transfer by the ADH enzyme.
This phenomenon is the basis of Esaki diodes, and the resonant form of it requires electrons to have discrete
energies. This phenomenon can also be observed when a Cooper Pair flows from between superconductors
across an insulating material in the Josephson effect. For 10 points, identify this process where a particles
passes through a potential barrier, used in some scanning microscopes.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
The Rammsauer-Townsend effect describes situations in which this occurs with unity probability. The
WKB approximation can be used to show that the probability of this occurring is exponentially dependent
on twice the integral of the magnitude of the classical momentum over h-bar, although the classical
momentum is imaginary in the relevant region. This effect is the basis for a type of diode invented by Leo
Esaki, while the Josephson effect depends on it occurring in an insulating oxide layer. For a delta-function
potential, its probability scales as the inverse of the quantity one plus the square of the wavelength of the
incoming particle, while for finitely wide potentials, the probability of this happening drops off
exponentially with the potential width. First applied to alpha decay, FTP identify this quantum mechanical
phenomenon in which particles may be spontaneously transmitted through a potential barrier.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
In the WKB approximation, the probability of this process is given by e to the minus integral of the
wave number between turning points, all over the square of one plus one-fourth the same exponential. The
preformation probability times the rebound frequency times the probability of this process gives the rate of
alpha decay in the Gamow [GAM-off] model. Because the wavefunction decays exponentially in regions of
high potential, the wave function amplitude is in general non-zero outside of finite potential barriers, which
explains this process. The transmission coefficient gives the probability of this process. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon in which a particle crosses a potential barrier of energy greater than its own energy, a
process that is not classically allowed.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
This phenomenon is at the center of a phenomenon in which particles below the Fermi level exhibit
cold emission. It also explains how SQUIDs work because of the Josephson effect, in which there is
electron flow between superconductors connected, and it also explains how enzymes work. For ten
points, name this phenomenon in which the probability distribution of a particle's presence is partially
beyond a classically forbidden barrier, present in a certain type of scanning microscope.
ANSWER: Quantum Tunneling
In bulk metals, this effect explains field electron emission and is described by the Fowler-Nordheim type
equations. Erasing a NOR flash cell is dependent on this effect occurring in the floating gate, and this effect
can be used to achieve negative differential resistance in a particular type of diode named for Esaki. This
phenomenon results in the production of a current in the DC Josephson effect. Alpha decay is governed by
this process, in which a particle's Schrodinger equation is represented as a decaying exponential function.
For 10 points, name this phenomenon of quantum mechanics in which a particle can go through a
classically forbidden region.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
In the Ramsauer-Townsend effect, this phenomenon occurs with unity probability when certain boundary
conditions are satisfied. The variety of this by which long-range order is preserved in SQUIDs is called the
Josephson effect, whereby a current flows across two weakly coupled superconductors. A diode which
makes use of this property was developed by Esaki, while Gurney and Condon discovered that it could
explain alpha decay, though that result was also obtained concurrently by Gamow. Perhaps its most famous
application, invented by Binnig and Rohrer, is the STM. FTP, identify this phenomenon by which a particle
may pass through a classically impenetrable barrier.
ANSWER: quantum tunneling
A telescope that takes advantage of this phenomenon was developed by Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer,
and this can occur with superconducting Cooper pairs at a Josephson junction. As explained by the Hartman
effect, particles experiencing this can in some cases travel faster than the speed of light. George Gamow
used this to explain alpha decay, which takes place even though alpha particles should be trapped in a
potential well. Also known as barrier penetration, this is sometimes explained using the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle. Name this phenomenon that arises when the Schrodinger equation gives a nonzero
probability for an event that would never happen according to the laws of classical physics.
ANSWER: quantum tunnelling [accept barrier penetration before it is mentioned]
Foot and Lew proposed certain complementarity relations between these particles and another group
of particles whose masses are related by the Koide formula. The relative likelihood of one type of
these particles turning into another type is given by the CKM matrix. These particles cannot be
isolated due to a property called confinement, and the force that governs them is weakest when they
are nearest each other, a phenomenon called asymptotic freedom. That force is mediated by (*)
gluons. For 10 points, name these particles with fractional electric charge named by Murray Gell-Mann,
which combine in threes and twos to form hadrons and mesons, such as the pion and proton, examples of
which include the strange, up, and down types.
ANSWER: quarks
These particles give their name to an epoch shortly after the big bang during which the average energy of
particle collision was too high to form hadrons. They are the only elementary particles in the Standard
Model that experience all four fundamental interactions. Hadrons are classified in terms of how many
"valence" types of these particles they have. One of these particles and its anti-variety form a meson, and
baryons are formed from a combination of three of them. For 10 points, give the name for these particles
that come in charm, strange, up, and down varieties.
ANSWER: quarks [accept more specific types]
The classification scheme for these particles was developed independently by Gell-Mann and Zweig.
Evidence for their existence was gathered through deep inelastic scattering experiments at SLAC. These
particles have a non-integer electric charge as well as a color charge. These fundamental particles combine
to form hadrons. For 10 points, name this set of particles with names like strange and charmed.
ANSWER: quarks
According to quantum chromodynamics, these entities can be red, green, or blue, and interact by
exchanging gluons. The closer together they are, the less they interact, a phenomenon known as asymptotic
freedom. Baryons have half-integer spin because they are made up of three of these particles; for example,
two "up" and one "down" constitute a proton. For 10 points, name these subatomic particles whose six
"flavors" include "top," "strange," and "charm."
ANSWER: quarks
A particle known as X(3872) may consist of four of these particles, an unstable type of which is known
as the "sea" variety. Experiments involving deep inelastic scattering provided the first significant evidence
of their existence, and the Eightfold Way model was a predecessor of a model involving these particles.
Due to color confinement, they cannot exist in isolation, but only in the form of hadrons. For 10 points,
name these particles which come in six flavors, including charm and bottom.
ANSWER: quarks
Changes in these particles are handled mathematically by the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa [kah-BEEBboe koe-bye-YAH-shee mahs-KAW-wah] matrix, whose complex number terms are used to handle CP
violation. One of the forces containing them gets stronger as distance increases, leading to their
confinement, but explaining why they are free to move about within other particles, their asymptotic
freedom. Efforts to separate them create mesons, which are a combination of these particles with their
antiparticles. Name these fundamental particles, three of which make baryons such as protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: quarks
Baryon number equals one-third times the difference in the number of these particles and the
number of their antiparticles. The attractive force between these particles increases as distance
increases due to asymptotic freedom. The fact that they are never found in isolation is called
confinement. Beta decay occurs when one of these particles (*) transforms into a different one. They
have an electric charge of either +2/3 or -1/3. Gluons mediate the strong force between them in the nucleus.
For ten points, name these particles theorized by Murray Gell-Mann, which come in strange and charm
flavors, and are the constituents of protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: quarks
One example of this class of particles participates in the GIM mechanism. That particle in a certain pair
undergoes OZI-suppressed three pion decay when in the n=1 and n=2 states. Theoretically, bombarding a
deuterium nucleus with gamma rays will produce the undiscovered penta- form of this class of particles. A
phase in QCD consisting of free floating particles of this type and gluons forms the namesakeplasma
containing these particles. The J-psi particle is comprised of one variety of this particle and its antiparticle,
and one type of this particle is the heaviest of all elementary particles and was discovered at Fermilab in
1995. For 10 points, name this elementary particle with varieties like strange, top bottom, up, down, and
charm.
ANSWER: quark [accept charm until "penta"]
The bag model describes how these particles interact with one another; when they get closer to each
other, they experience a decrease in the force holding them together, a phenomenon known as
asymptotic freedom. Beta decay is essentially the transition of one form of this particle to another
form. These particles are held together by the color charge, which is mediated by gluons. Combinations
of these particles are known as hadrons, which can be divided into baryons and mesons. Both protons and
neutrons are made up of three of these particles. For 10 points, name this group of six particles that include
the strange and charm varieties.
ANSWER: quark
The CKM matrix describes their decay and these particles- namesake soup, consisting of these and
gluons, theoretically exists at high temperatures and density. The force between these particles gets
weaker as they become closer, this is called asymptotic freedom. These particles (*) have a charge of
either positive two-thirds or negative one-third and they have a color charge as well. Because of the
phenomena color confinement, these particles can not exist in isolation and these particles combine to form
hadrons. For 10 points, identify these particles, which come in six flavors, with names like up, down, and
charmed.
ANSWER: quarks
For one of these particles, a rotation matrix whose angle is the Cabibbo angle describes the probability of
the weak force converting one of them into another. The force between two of these particles does not
diminish with increasing distance, leading them to cluster in small groups. That force between these
particles approaches zero at small distances. These particles are subject to confinement and asymptotic
freedom. These particles can possess charges such as +2/3 and -1/3. Three of them combine to form a
baryon such as a proton or neutron, and they are linked by gluons. For 10 points, name these elementary
particles that come in bottom, down, up, top, strange, and charmed varieties.
ANSWER: quarks [Accept baryons on the first sentence.]
The Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix represents properties held by these objects, and Cabibbo lends his
name to a parameter describing their mixing. A model of these objects was proposed by George Zweig,
who called them "aces," but an independent formulator of a similar model, Murray Gell-Mann, is
responsible for their name. Quantum chromodynamics describes the interactions of, for 10 points,
what fundamental particles that come in strange, charm, top, bottom, up, and down varieties?
ANSWER: quarks
Two rare varities of these particles comprise the J/psi (Jay-Sy) meson. Free versions of these particles
do not exist due to the phenomenon of confinement in QCD. Evidence for their existence was gathered
through deep inelastic scattering experiments at SLAC. These particles have a non-integer electric charge
as well as a color charge. They come in six flavors, including charm, top, and strange, and are held together
by gluons. For 10 points, name this set of particles, three of which form a proton or neutron.
ANSWER: quarks
The CKM matrix describes their decay, and the bag model explains the asymptotic freedom exhibited by
their confinement. Once hypothesized to be composed of preons, these particles are found in a phase of
QCD matter along with gluons. The weak force mediates the interconversion of these particles, each with an
electric charge of two-thirds or negative one-third. First proposed by Murray Gell-Mann, these particles
combine to form hadrons, including protons and neutrons. For 10 points, name these subatomic particles
found in up, down, top, bottom, strange, and charm varieties.
ANSWER: quarks
The bag model explains why these non-bosonic particles cannot be independently observed, which
is their property of confinement. These particles were introduced by George Zweig and Murray
Gell-Mann. The theory of color charge was first introduced in these particles, which are modeled in
QCD. They carry charge in multiples of (*) one-third. A meson consists of one of these particles and its
antiparticle. For 10 points, name these subatomic particles, which come in flavors such as up, down, charm,
and strange.
ANSWER: quarks
In March 2009, the D0 group announced the discovery of the production of a single one of one of
these objects through the weak force. That one has a mass comparable to a gold atom nucleus, and was
the sixth and last to be discovered. In addition to the "top" one, the "up" and "down" ones make up
protons and neutrons. Their name was coined by Murray Gell-Mann after a passage from Finnegan's
Wake. For 10 points, name these subatomic particles, believed to be fundamental constituents of
matter.
ANSWER: quarks [accept early top quark]
One type of these particles is the namesake of a type of tagging used in analysis of collider events. A
bound state of two of these particles was discovered by Ting and Richter and was called J-psi. These
particles cannot be isolated as singlets due to the property of confinement, and they also carry color charge.
Within a hadron, they are held together by gluons, and their flavors include charm, strange, top, and
bottom. For 10 points, name this fundamental particle posited by Gell-Mann, three of which make up
protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: quark [accept more specific answers like strange quark]
Edwin Salpeter confirmed the discovery of the first of these objects to be identified. Daily variation
by at least one order of magnitude is demonstrated in the optically violent variable type of these
objects. One of these appears as four distinct objects, called the (*) Einstein Cross. The oldest known
one of these objects was formed during the universe's structure formation stage. The first of these objects
to be discovered was located in the constellation Virgo and was notable for its high redshift. These objects
are powered by the gravitational accretion in supermassive black holes. For 10 points, name these very
bright and very distant radio sources.
ANSWER: Quasars [or Quasi-Stellar Radio Sources; prompt on active galactic nuclei or AGN]
Halton Arp tried unsuccessfully to prove that these objects could be connected by gaseous bridges, and they
are distinguished from BL Lac objects because their continuum spectra show unusual emission lines, which
were first explained by Maarten Schmidt. These objects reached their peak population in the universe about
ten billion years ago, and the first to be discovered was 3C 273, located in the constellation Virgo. These
objects operate under the same mechanism as radio galaxies, with their name derived from the fact they are
very strong radio sources, though they are now thought to surround the central supermassive black holes of
large galaxies. Producing ten to one hundred times more energy than the entire Milky Way in an area the
size of our solar system, name these extremely distant objects, the most luminous objects in the universe.
ANSWER: quasar [accept quasi-stellar radio source]
The spectra of these objects feature a "big blue bump" in the UV to optical region. Although not
Seyfert galaxies, line widths greater than 10,000 kilometers per second characterize the broad line
region of these objects. These objects can be used to determine the time of the reionization era
because their spectra contain many absorption lines in the Lyman-alpha forest, which is absorbed by
neutral hydrogen to create a Gunn-Peterson trough. Observation of two of these objects provided the first
direct evidence for gravitational lensing. These objects are powered by an accretion disc around a
supermassive black hole. For 10 points, identify these very luminous active galactic nuclei that are normally
classified as either "radio-quiet" or "radio-loud".
ANSWER: quasars [or quasi-stellar radio sources; or quasi-stellar objects; or QSOs; accept double quasars or double QSOs; or active galactic nuclei; or AGN]
These objects are similar to a type of object with a continuous spectrum called a BL Lac object. One of
these object discovered in 1979 was the first observed instance of gravitational lensing. These objects are a
type of active galactic nuclei, and are believed to be powered by the accretion disc formed from a supermassive black hole at the center of a galaxy. An extremely compact form of these objects is called a blazar
("blaze-are"). These bodies have charactistically high redshifts. For 10 points, name these distant
astronomical objects that emit large amounts of energetic light.
ANSWER: quasar [or quasi-stellar radio source]
Their spectra can show the Gunn-Peterson trough if the light passed through interstellar hydrogen and the
existence of one of these appearing as two separate objects around a galaxy gives evidence of gravitational
lensing. They are similar to Seyfert galaxies and BL Lacertae Objects, the latter of which along with the
OVV type of these make up the blazars. Their output is across a wide range of the spectrum and they show
variation over time in brightness. For 10 points, identify these distant radiative objects that are believed to
be powered by supermassive black holes.
ANSWER: quasar [accept quasistellar radio sources]
Maarten Schmidt discovered that these entities were much more common in the early Universe than in
modern times, providing support for the Big Bang theory. It is predicted that when the Andromeda Galaxy
collides with the Milky Way, one of these objects will be formed. These astronomical entities surround the
supermassive black holes located at the center of galaxies, and they are powered by an accretion disk. The
brightest one of these entities is located in the constellation Virgo, and these entities have very high
redshifts. For 10 points, name these extremely powerful entities which emit enormous amounts of energy.
ANSWER: Quasars [accept quasi-stellar radio sources]
Many recent studies have sought to pinpoint 'dust-reddened- ones of these through LoBALs, or
broad absorption lines. Neutral hydrogen clouds create a characteristic suppression in their spectra
in the Gunn-Peterson Effect. They were first discovered by Marten Schmidt, and Einstein's theory of
gravitational lensing was first confirmed by one of them. Their spectral energy is believed to arise from
large amounts of matter falling into regions of extreme gravity. Characterized by very high redshifts and
believed to be powered by supermassive black holes, for 10 points, identify these super-powerful active
galactic nuclei.
ANSWER: quasars (or quasi-stellar radio sources, also accept BL Lac objects, Blazars, OVVs, or Seyfert Galaxies; prompt on Active Galactic Nuclei before mention)
OVVs and BL Lacs are types of these objects, whose spectra feature UV gaps known as Gunn-Peterson
troughs and "forests" of absorption lines in the Lyman-alpha transition range. The first of these discovered
was 3C 273 in the constellation Virgo. Gravitational lensing was first observed in one of these objects,
which may be radio-loud or radio-quiet. They have very high redshifts, indicating that they are very distant.
They are thought to be powered by accretion disks surrounding supermassive black holes. For 10 points,
name these most luminous objects in the universe, named for their resemblance to stars.
ANSWER: quasar or quasi-stellar objects [prompt on "blazars"; prompt on "active galactic nuclei"]
The vast majority of these objects have been found by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, which in the past eight
years has discovered more than 100,000 of them. They contain a significant number of population-III stars,
as indicated by spectral evidence of elements heavier than helium. Despite their name they admit radiation
across the entire observable spectrum, and in fact are brightest in near-ultraviolet, although we receive it as
near-infrared. While their physics is still not completely known, they are believed to be powered by the
accretion disks of supermassive black holes. FTP, name this type of active galactic nucleus, extremely
distant objects with luminosities greater than most galaxies.
ANSWER: Quasar
One feature of these objects is the Gunn-Peterson trough. The presence of a faint absorption line
distinguishes BL Lac from these objects, though a 2006 paper hypothesizes that BL Lac objects, gamma
ray bursters, and these objects are varities of the same object. The brightest of these is found in Virgo,
and these objects are often found surrounding supermassive black holes. For 10 points, name these
objects typically found near the center of galaxies, whose name is shorthand for "quasi-stellar object."
ANSWER: quasar [accept QSO until "quasi"; accept quasi-stellar object until "quasi"]
These objects were claimed to be associated with nearby galaxies by Harold Arp. Maarten Schmidt,
who also discovered that these objects were more common in the early universe, and Bev Oke
discovered the first type of this object, which was called 3C 273. The suppression of wavelengths
below the Lyman Alpha line in these object's spectra is known as the Gunn-Peterson trough.
Gavitational lensing was first confirmed by the "twin" version of these objects and further verified by
Einstein's Cross. These objects are powered by accretion disks and exhibit the highest redshift in the known
universe. For 10 points, name these highly energetic radio sources found at the center of early galaxies.
ANSWER: Quasar
When these structures have jets oriented towards the Earth, they are known as BL Lacertae
(LAH-sir-tay) objects. They can be found by looking for high levels of X-ray emission, which is caused by
their formation as accretions around supermassive black holes. Like radio and Seyfert galaxies, they are a
kind of active galactic nucleus. Their high redshift indicates their tremendous distance from Earth and age.
For 10 points, identify these astronomical objects, named for their original description as "quasi-stellar
radio sources."
ANSWER: quasars
Their spectra are similar to those of Seyfert Galaxies, and the BL Lac objects were once classified as a type
of these. The spectra of many of these objects contain a series of absorption lines at the Lyman alpha
transition wavelengths. 3C 273 was the first of these objects discovered by Sandage and Mathews in the
Virgo cluster, and its spectrum indicated its redshift implied it had 90% of the velocity of light. Some of
these objects have been measured to be as far away as thirteen billion light years. For 10 points, name these
objects, believed to be an accretion disk powered by a supermassive black hole, and the oldest, farthest, and
brightest objects detected in the night sky.
ANSWER: Quasar [or Quasi Stellar Object; or Quasi Stellar Radio Source; prompt on AGN; prompt on active galactic nucleus/nuclei]
The observation of a double one of these confirmed the gravitational lens effect predicted by Einstein's
General Theory of Relativity. The first truly triple one was found at W.M.Keck Observatory Mauna Kea,
Hawaii. The brightest one of these celestial bodies in the sky is 3C 273, and the luminosity of these varies
on a variety of time scales. Accretion discs around black holes are believed to power these bodies, and they
were first identified as being high redshift sources of electromagnetic energy. For 10 points, name these
celestial bodies which surround supermassive black holes in the center of massive galaxies, which pulsate
energy.
ANSWER: Quasars
This technology is used in a type of active observation astronomy, where its strength depends inversely
on the fourth power of the distance to an object. One type of this device uses the Doppler effect to detect
speed. Nap-of-the-earth is one way to exploit the horizon of this technology and is also known as flying
under it. For 10 points, name this system of detecting objects that uses radio waves and which is used to
detect weather formations, such as thunderstorms.
ANSWER: radar [or radio detecting and ranging]
The total amount of energy to turn into this is proportional to the temperature according to Stefan's law, and
Wien's law states that its peak wavelength is also proportional to the temperature. Planck researched the
distribution of its thermal type's intensity, called a blackbody curve. A blue variety of it is released in
another type named after Chernenkov. The Greek letters alpha, beta, and gamma distinguish its ionizing
form. FTP, energy traveling from one body to another can be labeled with what term associated with X-rays
and cancer?
ANSWER: Radiation (on early buzz accept blackbody/thermal radiation)
Its power to the square of charge acceleration in relativistic systems is given by its namesake
Larmor formula. A blue cone of light appears as a particle goes supra-luminal in the Cherenkov
variety of it, while the amount of energy emitted by an object due to it is proportional to the (*) fourth
power of absolute temperature via Stefan's Law. Also coming in an electromagnetic variety, it can
propagate through the vaucum of space. For 10 points, identify this type of energy transfer often contrasted
with conduction and convection.
ANSWER: radiation [accept Cherenkov radiation before "Cherenkov"]
One law governing this phenomenon states that its power is proportional to one over "e to the h nu
over k t minus one." Kirchhoff's Law governing this phenomenon states that spectral absorption
equals emissivity. The power of one form of it is proportional to temperature to the fourth power
according to the (*) Stefan-Boltzmann Law. The quantization of energy was first explained in a model of
this phenomenon which explained the ultraviolet catastrophe. Black bodies are perfect absorbers of it. For
ten points, name this phenomenon in which thermal energy is transferred without matter, often contrasted
with conduction and convection.
ANSWER: thermal radiation (accept word forms; accept blackbody radiation)
It's not gravity, but a torsion balance was used to measure this phenomenon by Nichols and Hall. A
differential of this phenomenon across the dawn and dusk lines of an asteroid is responsible for the
Yarkovsky effect. For small particles of dust, this phenomenon overwhelms the Poynting-Robertson
drag, causing them to blow (*) out of the solar system. It is equal to the time average of the Poynting
vector divided by the speed of light. Its strength is equal to one third times the energy density, or one third
times the fourth power of the temperature times an expression involving the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Its
strength is proportional to the reflectance of the body and can be derived from the fact that photons have
momentum. For 10 points, name this phenomenon which is the basis of the solar sail, which occurs when
electromagnetic waves exert a force on an object.
ANSWER: radiation pressure
Karl Jansky pioneered the study of these things and lends his name to a unit of flux density most commonly
used to measure these things. The existence of Jupiter's magnetosphere was first suggested by the
"decametric emission", which was one of these things. Because telescopes that detect them have very low
resolving power, technique like VLBI are used, like at the Very Large Array. 3C 273 was first detected by
emissions of this type, leading to its designation as a "quasar". The Arecibo dish telescope collects data in
this band of the EM spectrum. For 10 points, name this segment of the electromagnetic spectrum that has
longer wavelengths than microwaves.
ANSWER: radio waves [prompt on "light"; prompt on "photons"]
This phenomenon was discovered when several different similar salts consistently fogged up a
paper-covered photographic plate. That discovery was made by Henri Becquerel. Polonium and radium
were discovered to have this property by the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics, Marie Curie. For
the point, name this property that allows certain isotopes to emit gamma rays and alpha or beta particles,
thereby transmuting one element into another.
ANSWER: radioactivity [accept word forms]
A 2010 paper reported that a new calculation of one of these quantities differs by 5.0 standard deviations
from CODATA's value. That quantity is the "charge" type of this property for the proton. The StokesEinstein equation for the diffusion constant has this value and viscosity in the denominator. Another of
these quantities is equal to h-bar divided by electron mass, speed of light, and fine structure constant and is
named for Bohr. This value is inversely proportional to centripetal acceleration, and is crossed with force to
give torque. A type of this property is defined as the distance at which line cannot escape a black hole and is
named for Schwarzschild. For 10 points, name this property that is multiplied by 2 pi to give the
circumference of a circle.
ANSWER: radius [or charge radius; or Bohr radius; or Schwarzschild radius]
The sixth power of this quantity is proportional to the differential cross section of Rayleigh
scattering. In Stokes' law, it is multiplied by the settling velocity, dynamic viscosity, and six pi to give
drag. One form of this quantity is the ensemble average of the interparticle distance. The root mean
square of distances from the center of gravity to the edge of a rigid body gives this quantity (*) "of
gyration". The moment of inertia of a collection of particles is equal to the sum of the product of the mass
times the square of this, and the moment of inertia is equal to two-fifths times the mass times this quantity
squared for a solid sphere. For 10 points, name this value, the cube of which times four thirds pi gives a
sphere's volume.
ANSWER: radius [or r or diameter or d; prompt on "size", "distance", "length", or "displacement"]
According to Stokes- Law, drag force is proportional to viscosity, velocity, and this other quantity.
Escape velocity is inversely proportional to its square root. Structural engineers often calculate this
quantity "of gyration" for a rotating object. The product of angular velocity and this property gives
an object's linear (*) velocity. Centripetal acceleration equals speed squared divided by this quantity.
Torque is the cross product of it and force. For ten points, name this quantity equal to the distance from an
axis for a rotating object, which is squared in the formula for area of a circle.
ANSWER: radius (or distance to the axis, or same-knowledge equivalents; accept diameter and lever arm which are technically correct for individual clues)
In one version of this effect, allowing higher order mutipole transitions diminishes its energy. When it emits
energy proportional to 3 times the incident frequency plus or minus the frequency of a transition, it's called
"hyper." Techniques based on this effect include a spatially-offset method, and another method involves
adsorbing molecules to a rough metal and is enhanced by incident radiation hitting plasmons. Only
molecules which undergo a change in polarization via this effect are visible in its namesake form of
spectroscopy, which often employs a continuous-wave laser. Emission occurs when the molecule either has
a net gain or loss in energy, giving the Stokes and anti-Stokes lines. For 10 points, name this inelastic
scattering of light by a molecule, named for an Indian physicist.
ANSWER: Raman effect
Jones and Stoicheff characterized an inverse version of this effect, which relies on the interaction of two
different pump waves. In solid-state media, this effect occurs together with the Kerr effect due to the
instantaneous response of the electrons, and it is used to induce qubit transitions in ion-trap quantum
computing. The selection rule for this process requires a non-zero polarizability derivative, and plasmons
are reponsible for its surface-enchanced variety. This effect occurs when an electron enters a virtual excited
state, then relaxes by photon emission to a higher or lower vibrational energy level, creating respectively the
Stokes and anti-Stokes lines. Also the basis of a type of spectroscopy employing a continuous-wave laser,
FTP, name this type of inelastic scattering named for an Indian physicist.
ANSWER: Raman scattering [accept Raman effect or Raman spectroscopy]
Interference in applications of this effect is often mitigated using a 785 nanometer light source to reduce
competition with fluorescence. This effect is most prevalent when, for at least one component, there is a
non-zero derivative of the rho-sigma component of the polarizability tensor with respect to the normal
coordinate of vibration at equilibrium. The selection rule for the related spectroscopy requires delta J be
plus or minus two or zero, and it can be augmented via interaction with surface plasmons. This effect
proceeds by inducing a virtual excited state, which relaxes producing a peak slightly below and a weaker
one slightly above the Rayleigh peak. Those are Stokes and Anti-stokes lines in its spectra. For 10 points,
name this type of inelastic scattering discovered by an Indian physicist in 1928.
ANSWER: Raman scattering [accept Raman Effect, or Raman Spectroscopy, prompt on inelastic scattering, prompt on Stokes scattering before mentioned]
In the nonlinear hyper version of this effect, otherwise forbidden silent modes are seen, and in another
variant, its strength is increased by the excitation of plasmons in small metal particles. The stimulated form
of it can be used in silicon chips or fiber optics to create an eponymous kind of laser, and in biological
applications of it, a 785 nanometer source is often used to minimize the competing effect of fluorescence.
Three lasers are used to gather information about the vibrational modes of chemical bonds susceptible to
changes in polarizability in the coherent anti-Stokes variety of it. For 10 points, identify this type of
inelastic scattering named for its Indian discoverer.
ANSWER: Raman scattering [or Raman effect; or Raman spectroscopy; prompt on inelastic scattering]
Variations of this process accounting for long-range correlation are specified by the Hurst parameter. Only
in the theta solvent does nu equal one-half a polymer have properties predicted by the simple form of this
process. A Levy flight is a type of this process that uses a heavy-tailed probability distribution with infinite
variance. Polya proved that the probability of this process returning to the origin for an n-dimensional
lattice where n is greater than two is less than one, and mass transfer in diffusion occurs through this
process. For 10 points, name this process exemplified by the motion of particles suspended in a fluid, or
Brownian motion.
ANSWER: random walk [accept Brownian motion before it is read]
This process includes two steps involving isobaric heat transfer. The first step is pumping the working fluid
to a high pressure, which is at that stage a liquid. The second step is heating the working fluid to the point
where it becomes a saturated vapor. The third step is expanding the working fluid through a turbine; this
step is responsible for generating eighty percent of the world's electricity. The fourth step condenses the
working fluid back to a liquid. In power plants, the efficiency of this cycle can be increased with by adding
a reheat or feedwater heating step. This power generation cycle models steam engines, and is named for a
Scottish engineer. For ten points, identify this thermodynamic cycle, a more practical version of the Carnot
cycle.
ANSWER: Rankine cycle [Do not accept Carnot cycle]
A type of instability when a light fluid supports a heavy fluid against gravity is named after Taylor and this
man, who is also the namesake of a value governing stability of flow between concentric spinning cylinders.
He is also the namesake of the product of the Grashof and Prandtl numbers. Waves associated with the
surface of the earth are named for Lamb and this man, and he lends his name to a value that governs
diffraction, his namesake criterion. He had his work concerning electromagnetic blackbody radiation
corrected by Planck. That law bears the name of James Jeans and, FTP, which English physicist whose
namesake scattering is responsible for the color of the sky?
ANSWER: John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh
The critical value of this man's namesake dimensionless number represents a transition from conduction
to convection. The ultraviolet catastrophe resulted from a law for blackbody radiation he co-named with
Jeans breaking down at short wavelengths. One phenomenon named for him has a cross-section
proportional to the inverse-fourth power of the wavelength. This man names a method of estimating
angular resolution, his namesake criterion. For 10 points, name this English physicist who names a type of
scattering which gives the sky its blue color.
ANSWER: John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh [accept either underlined portion]
After marrying Arthur Balfour's sister, this scientist worked on the acoustics textbook The Theory of
Sound. This scientist isolated argon and is the first namesake of a law of electromagnetic radiation whose
inaccuracy at low wavelengths was dubbed the "ultraviolet catastrophe." For 10 points, name this British
physicist whose namesake form of scattering is the reason the sky appears blue.
ANSWER: Lord Rayleigh [or John William Strutt]
This man showed how interaural level differences and interaural time differences lead to sound
localization. He first mathematically described the instability of a denser fluid when placed above a less
dense fluid, an instability co-named for Taylor. The viscosity and thermal diffusivity appear in the
denominator of his namesake number, which is low when conduction occurs and high when convection
occurs. For a circular aperture, 1.22 times the wavelength divided by the aperture's diameter yields this
man's criterion, which gives the minimal angular separation required to resolve two separate images.
When the natural frequency of the atom is much greater than that of incident radiation, his namesake
scattering occurs. For 10 points, name this physicist who won the 1904 Nobel Prize for the discovery of
argon.
ANSWER: John William Strutt, Lord Rayleigh [accept either]
The waves named for this person, which are very similar to Lamb waves, travel along solid surfaces and are
generated by earthquakes. His name also is used for the situation when the minimum amplitude of one
diffraction image coincides with the maximum amplitude of another, his namesake criterion. This person is
also named for the elastic scattering of light, which is used to explain why the sky is blue. Name this
scientist whose namesake scattering is often contrasted with Raman [RAH-mun] scattering.
ANSWER: 3rd Baron Lord Rayleigh (or John William Strutt)
Meteorologist Ragnar Fjortoft found a necessary condition for instability of inviscid parallel plane flows
that is stronger than this man's inflection point criterion. This man showed that inviscid Couette flow is
unstable if the square of "r squared omega" decreases with radius, a result later extended by the linear
stability analysis of G. I. Taylor. He predicted a type of surface wave that travels slower than Love, S and P
waves, and he found a one over wavelength to the fourth power dependence in the intensity resulting from
his namesake elastic light scattering process, while another formulation partially named for this Englishman
leads to the ultraviolet catastrophe. For 10 points, name this man who also formulated a classical blackbody
theory with Jeans.
ANSWER: John Strutt or 3rd Baron Rayleigh
This man added an H-squared term to the standard definition of magnetization to describe
Barkhausen noise at low field strengths. A value named for this man is the product of the Grashof
and Prandtl numbers and tells whether heat transfer is occurring through conduction or convection.
This man names a statement that the inverse sine of 1.22 times lambda over diameter is the (*)
minimum angle of resolution for diffraction through a circular aperture. Another phenomenon named for
this man has cross section proportional to the sixth power of particle diameter and inverse fourth power of
incident wavelength. For 10 points, name this English scientist who names a form of scattering that turns
the sky blue.
ANSWER: John Strutt, Third Baron Rayleigh [accept either underlined portion]
Coulson solved Chandrasekhar's X and Y functions for this process when a Lambert surface was
underneath. The Babinet point is an example of a neutral point predicted by the theory of this effect. It is
inversely proportional to the fourth power of the wavelength of the light. This process predominates when
the size of the particle is much smaller than the wavelength. This effect is seen as light travels through
transparent solids and liquids, but is most noticeable in gases. This effect is enhanced for short wavelengths.
For 10 points, name this elastic process named for British scientist that causes the sky to appear blue.
ANSWER: Rayleigh scattering
The equation modeling this phenomenon was used by Einstein to approximate Avogadro's number and
represents the intensity of this phenomenon as a factor of the number of particles present, the square of
polarizability, and the inverse of the 4th power of the wavelength of the relevant radiation. This phenomenon
is weaker than a similar one named after Thompson and affects smaller neutral particles than the Mie
variety, which makes affected areas appear white. Most effective at high frequency radiation, for 10 points,
name this type of scattering that makes the sky appear blue.
ANSWER: Rayleigh scattering
It is thought that these objects could be formed by the quick burning of Population III stars into heavier
elements - a hypothesis that also explains why a metal-free object of this type has never been observed. The
structures of these objects are entirely convective and therefore causes them to display prominences and
flares more often then similar objects leading to many of these objects being described as 'flare stars-. One
of these objects, Gliese 581, was found to have an extrasolar planet of only 5 Earth masses and the closest
star to our sun, Proxima Centauri is classified as one. Constituting the majority of all stars, for 10 points,
identify these objects classified as K and M on the HR-diagram - low mass and low temperature stars that
are able to burn hydrogen unlike brown dwarfs.
ANSWER: red dwarfs
The flares of one of these objects named AU Mic have been studied in detail by the Crimean Astrophysical
Observatory. Scientists recently found a rocky planet about twice the size of Earth orbiting Gliese 876,
which is one of these objects. These stars lack a radiative zone, meaning that helium does not accumulate at
the core and they only die when all hydrogen in the entire star is used up. Stars of this type near Earth
include Wolf 359, Barnard's Star, and the closest star to Earth, Proxima Centauri, which cannot be seen
without a telescope despite their proximity. Main sequence stars of K or M class, for 10 points, name this
most common type of star in the galaxy, which is heavier than a brown dwarf.
ANSWER: Red Dwarfs
Stars in this stage display S-process elements in their spectra and diverge into a "horizontal branch"
and a "clump." The beginning of this phase marks a star's first dredge-up, at which point it will
begin to ascend the asymptotic branch of the HR diagram named for these stars. Especially low-mass
stars (*) cannot enter this phase because they are fully convective; stars in this stage either fuse hydrogen
into helium in their shells, over a large inert helium core, or, later, form carbon via the triple-alpha process.
Larger, "super" variants of these stars include Betelgeuse, and examples of these stars include Aldebaran.
Earth's sun will one day become, for 10 points, what kind of large star characterized by a certain highwavelength color?
ANSWER: red giant [prompt on giant]
The cores of these stars are convectively mixed with their outer layers in a process known as dredge-up.
They-re not white dwarfs, but these stars experience periods of helium burning known as thermal pulses.
These stars, which are of luminosity class II or III and spectral class K or M, have run out of hydrogen in
their core and instead draw fuel from a shell around the core. Some of these stars enter a namesake
asymptotic branch on the HR-diagram, and they often lose their outer mass to planetary nebulae before
reducing into a white dwarf. For 10 points, name these large, cool stars such as Aldebaran and Arcturus,
which are smaller than a "super" variety exemplified by Betelgeuse.
ANSWER: red giants
A type of these objects located at the "tip" of their namesake "branch" are used as standard candles. The
occurrence of a degenerate core causes them to increase temperature very rapidly while maintaining their
volumes, which results in the "helium flash," after which convert three helium nuclei to a carbon-12 nucleus
via a Beryllium intermediate in the triple alpha process. Eventually, their outer regions expand to form a
planetary nebula, after which they become white dwarves. For 10 points, identify these stars exemplified by
Arcturus, whose cool temperatures are the cause of their namesake color.
ANSWER: red giants
Erwin Finlay-Freundlich proposed one explanation for this phenomenon that claimed its strength should be
proportional to the radiation density. A version of this phenomenon in the CMB is known as the SachsWolfe 
effect, while the quantity that describes the strength of this effect has a value of about 1100 for the
surface of last scattering. One version of this effect was measured using the Mossbauer effect in an
experiment by Pound and Rebka, and the magnitude of this effect is usually denoted "z." For 10 points,
name this phenomenon, which can be caused by gravity or the Doppler effect, in which the wavelength of
an object's light appears longer to an observer.
ANSWER: redshift [do not accept or prompt on "Doppler effect"]
One type of this phenomenon was measured using a Fe-57 detector in the Harvard Tower experiment. This
effect produces the first-degree anisotropy in the CMBR. Recombination of hydrogen atoms occurred at a
value of approximately 1100 for the quantity associated with this effect, whose cosmological variety
increases with age and distance; that is because the universe is (*) expanding according to Hubble's law. A
few objects, such as Andromeda, exhibit the opposite of this effect, because they are moving towards us.
For 10 points, name this phenomenon, in which the wavelength of astronomical objects receding from Earth
broadens, producing a namesake change in color.
ANSWER: redshift [accept gravitational redshift on the first line]
A nine-year survey of this phenomenon conducted by the Center for Astrophysics led to the
discovery of the Great Wall supercluster. One quantity with this name is equal to GM over c squared
times R in the gravitational case, and is roughly equal to relativistic beta for low velocities. That
quantity, symbolized z, has been measured at values as high as (*) 9.4 for gamma ray bursts and 7.1 for
quasars. The expansion of the universe means that this effect is universally observed in cosmological
radiation, because it arises from the Doppler effect for an emitter moving away from an observer. For 10
points, name this increase in radiation wavelength, named for a long-wavelength color.
ANSWER: redshift [prompt on Doppler shift or effect before mention]
The Rees-Sciama effect describes how this occurs as a result of retention of energy from superclusters. The
Sachs-Wolfe effect because of an example of this phenomenon observed in cosmic microwave background
radiation, and it can be measured on earth via the Mossbauer effect, a technique first used in the Pound-
Rebka experiment. Quasars have notably high values of it and it can be caused by the Doppler effect. For 10
points, name this increase in the wave length of electromagnetic radiation, named for the color at the low
energy end of the electromagnetic spectrum.
ANSWER: Redshift (accept gravitational redshift)
Alfred Schild argued that it could only occur if Minkowski space-time's geometry was violated. The
presence of this phenomenon in the CMBR due to the differential scattering of photons within a
potential is given by the (*) Sachs-Wolfe effect. It was observed in the emissions from iron 57 atoms in
the Pound-Rebka experiment and its existence, along with time dilation, was used as a test of the
equivalence principle. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that arises due the energy loss a photon
experiences as it passes through a gravitational field.
ANSWER: gravitational redshift (prompt on redshift)
Holger Muller and Stephen Chu recently published a method of measuring this effect using matter
waves in cesium atoms. One experiment to measure this effect placed a high-frequency hydrogen
MASER on a rocket and launched it into orbit. The fractional change in this effect is equal to onehalf times the 
Schwarzchild radius divided by R-star, for large R-star, which is double the change
predicted by Newtonian physics. An experiment measuring this effect, used a pair of loudspeaker cones
containing samples of Iron-57, one of the roof of Jefferson laboratory and one in the basement. That
experiment was performed by Pound and Rebka. For 10 points, name this effect predicted by general
relativity, in which light shining up a gravity well acquire a longer wavelength.
ANSWER: gravitational redshift [or Einstein shift]
The Lense-Thirring effect causes these things to "drag". Euler forces result when these things rotate nonuniformly. 
Einstein's equivalence principle states that gravity and acceleration depend only on these things.
Galilean transformations convert between these things, as do "boosts" involving the Lorentz factor, when
these are moving close to the speed of light. According to special relativity, none of these is absolute.
Fictitious forces arise when these are accelerating; for example, a rotating one is responsible for the
observed deflection of objects in the Coriolis effect. For 10 points, name these hypothetical coordinate
systems used by observers in physics problems.
ANSWER: reference frames [or inertial reference frames; or frames of reference]
In one form of this phenomenon, its direction is equal to the Householder matrix made from the
surface normal times the incident direction. One model of this phenomenon uses parameters called
ka, kd, and ks, which are constants. That model by Phong assesses the diffuse type of this, which has
intensity proportional to the dot product of the surface normal vector and the direction vector. In
addition to the Lambertian model, when this does not occur completely, its namesake coefficient is
very useful in calculating the attenuation constants. For smooth surfaces, the (*) specular type of this
phenomenon occurs. Its angle is equal to the angle of incidence, and for angles larger than the critical
angle, the total internal type of this occurs. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that occurs in mirrors.
ANSWER: reflection
The Oren-Nayar model for this phenomenon is more accurate than Lambert's law. This
phenomenon can either be diffuse or specular, depending on the texture of the surface. Another form
of this phenomenon only occurs above the critical angle and is known as the (*) "total internal" kind,
which is used in fiber optics. The "retro" version of this always sends light back to its source. For 10 points,
name this phenomenon where a beam of light bounces off a surface, which is best exemplified by a mirror.
ANSWER: reflection [accept word forms]
The Oren-Nayar model describes the diffuse of this phenomonenon, which is assumed to be
Lambertian in simple models, and which occurs when surfaces are not smooth. That type contrasts
with the (*) specular type. This phenomenon is absent when the angle of incidence of a particular ray is
Brewster's angle. The "law of" this phenomenon states that the angle of incidence and its namesake angle
are equal. For 10 points, name this optical phenomenon whose total internal type occurs beyond the critical
angle, which involves waves being bounced back to its origin.
ANSWER: reflection
The coefficient for this process in a transmission line is equal to the standing wave ratio, gamma,
minus one over quantity gamma plus one. Thin films designed to avoid this process typically have an
index of refraction equal to the square root of the surface's and a quarter-wavelength thickness. The
distinction between a "rough" and "smooth" surface separates its (*) "diffuse" and "specular" types. If
an unpolarized wave undergoes this process at Brewster's angle, it becomes linearly polarized. If this
process occurs from a low-n to high-n medium, the light has a phase change of 180 degrees. The law of this
process states that only direction is changed, so its angle is equal to the angle of incidence. For 10 points,
name this process for which one typically uses a mirror.
ANSWER: reflection [do not accept "refraction"]
The Bergeron diagram method can be used to calculate the effects of this phenomenon for electrical signals.
This phenomenon can be modeled for surfaces with parallel grooves by the Heidrich-Seidel distribution,
and its diffuse form is described by a model named for Lambert. This phenomenon does not occur at
Brewster's angle, and the total internal type of this phenomenon occurs at the critical angle. The angle at
which this phenomenon occurs is equal to the angle of incidence. For 10 points, name this phenomenon
which occurs when light hits a surface and bounces back, commonly exhibited by mirrors.
ANSWER: Reflection
The Oren-Nayar model of this phenomenon improves on another model which predicts that luminance is
angle-independent; that latter model by Lambert attempts to describe this phenomenon's diffuse form.
The transmission coefficient gives the fraction of particles undergoing tunneling instead of undergoing
this process. Signals propagate through a fiber optic cable using a type of this phenomenon. When the
angle of light striking a boundary is greater than the critical angle, the total internal type of it occurs. For
10 points, identify this phenomenon whose namesake law says that the angle of incidence equals the
angle of it, commonly exhibited by mirrors.
ANSWER: reflection [accept more specific answers, like diffuse reflection or total internal reflection]
One coefficient of this phenomenon can be found with Schlick's approximation, and its diffuse form
is applied in Lambert's cosine law. This phenomenon notably does not occur for a certain
polarization at Brewster's angle. At values above the critical angle, the (*) total internal type of this
phenomenon occurs, and the law of it states that the angle at which this process occurs is equal to the angle
of incidence. For ten points, identify this phenomenon in which a wave returns to its original medium after
contacting a surface, easily observed with mirrors.
ANSWER: reflection (accept word forms)
This process is used on beams of neutrons to determine the surface structure of thin films. Its diffuse form
is modeled well by a Lambertian model, in which intensity is directly proportional to the emission angle and
so perceived radiance is constant. For a given polarization, this phenomenon is minimized at Brewster's
angle. Above the critical angle, a "total internal" variety of this phenomenon occurs. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon in which a wavefront changes direction at an interface between two media so that it
returns to the first medium, which takes place with mirrors.
ANSWER: reflection
This phenomenon can be classified as either specular or diffuse. Seismic waves can undergo this
phenomenon within the earth, which has allowed seismologists to determine the layered structure of
the earth. At Brewster's angle, this phenomenon does not occur if the incident light is polarized, and
another type is critical in the operation of (*) fiber-optic cables; that variety is the "total internal" type.
When it occurs, the angle with the normal is unchanged. In acoustics, this causes echoes and is used in
sonar. For 10 points, name this optical phenomenon which occurs when light strikes a mirror.
ANSWER: reflection
The Lambertian model for this phenomenon applies to its diffuse form. The statement that the angle of
incidence equals the angle of this phenomenon holds for the specular form of this process. At an angle
greater than the critical angle for an interface, the total internal form of this occurs. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a wavefront approaches an interface and returns to the same medium, such as when
light hits a mirror.
ANSWER: reflection
The Hagen-Rubens relation connects this phenomenon in the infrared region to conductivity in
metals. For sound intensity, the directivity factor is a correction that accounts for surfaces exhibiting
this phenomenon. Two adjacent surfaces separated by a small gap that allow tunneling of evanescent
waves can exhibit a form of this phenomenon in a "frustrated" (*) variant. This phenomenon does not
occur for one polarization state at Brewster's angle. The inverse-sine of the ratio of two refractive indices
gives the critical angle for the "total internal" type of this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon
in which a ray of light bounces off a surface at an angle equal to the angle of incidence.
ANSWER: reflection [or emissivity until "correction" is read; or total internal reflection or TIR after "tunneling" is read]
This phenomenon is not observed in a thin film if the thickness times the index of refraction is a half-integer
multiple of wavelength. This phenomenon introduces "s-polarization" at an angle equal to the arctangent of
the ratios of the indies of refraction, at Brewster's angle. It can be "specular" or "diffuse." Above the
critical angle, the sparkle of diamonds occurs due to the "total internal" form of this phenomenon. In
general, this phenomenon results in an angle symmetric to the angle of incidence, with respect to the
normal. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which light turns around when it hits an object, such as a
mirror.
ANSWER: reflection [or total internal reflection]
A coefficient named for this phenomenon multiples the difference of the oncotic pressures across a
capillary membrane in Starling's equation. One version of this phenomenon is governed by the Lambert
cosine law, and it occurs when moving from high to low impedance in a transmission line. Along with the
transmittance, the amount of power lost to this phenomenon is calculated using the transfer-matrix method,
which is more general than the Fresnel equation. When occurring against a denser material, it changes the
phase by one-hundred-eighty degrees, and when occurring on rough surfaces, this phenomenon is called
diffuse. For 10 points, name this phenomenon whose namesake angle is equal to the angle of incidence,
which occurs when a wave bounces off a surface.
ANSWER: reflection
The Oren-Nayar model is a generalization of the Lambertian model of this phenomenon's diffuse form.
The waves involved in this phenomenon lie in the same plane as the normal to the medium interface, and
this phenomenon does not occur for a particular polarization at Brewster's angle. A wave undergoes the
"total internal" variety of this phenomenon at the critical angle, and the angle at which this phenomenon
occurs is equal to the angle of incidence. FTP, name this change in direction of a wave back into the
original medium, easily observable using mirrors.
ANSWER: Reflection
One type of this phenomenon causes a phase shift in polarized light known as the Goos-Hanchen effect. In
that type of this process, an evanescent wave propagates on the boundary of a medium. Under certain
conditions, this process will impart a 180-degree phase shift to a wave undergoing it. Above an angle given
by the arcsine of the ratio of refractive indices, known as the critical angle, a light wave is trapped in the
medium with the higher refractive index in the "total internal" type of this process. In the specular type of
this process, the angle of incidence equals the angle at which a light ray departs. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which waves bounce off a surface.
ANSWER: reflection [accept total internal reflection until mention]
At angles greater than the critical angle, the "total internal" type of this process occurs. When the surface
on which it occurs is smooth, the specular type of this process occurs. Surfaces can be coated with
interference films to decrease the occurrence of this process, or with silver to increase it. The angle of a
light ray after undergoing this process equals the angle of incidence. For 10 points, name this process that
occurs when a wave bounces off an object like a mirror.
ANSWER: reflection
A general model for the diffuse type of this process is named for Johann Heinrich Lambert, and there is also
a specular type of this phenomenon. It does not occur at Brewster's angle, and for angles greater than the
critical angle, the total internal type of this process occurs. A law from optics states the incident angle is
equals to its namesake angle. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, the rebounding of light waves at the
boundary of a medium.
ANSWER: reflection
Johann Lambert names a model of its diffuse form. None of this phenomenon occurs when the angle of
incidence with a boundary is Brewster's angle. Its "specular" form involves only one incoming and outgoing
direction. Its "total internal" form occurs in fiber-optic materials and occurs at angles above the critical
angle
from the normal. Its "retro" form can be achieved by using three perpendicular mirrors. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon, in which light hits a surface and rebounds in the other direction.
ANSWER: reflection
The radiation per unit solid angle of a wave undergoing this process varies with the cosine of the angle
between the line of sight and the perpendicular. Lambert's emission law applies to the directionally
independent form of this process, in which a microscopically rough interface causes it to occur in many
different angles in the "diffuse" type of this phenomenon. The "specular" variety of this process is modeled
by a law which states that the angle of incidence equals this process's namesake angle. For 10 points, name
this optical phenomenon in which a wavefront rebounds off of a surface, often facilitated by mirrors.
ANSWER: reflection
The BLITS satellite is a spherical module that tested the retro- variety of this phenomenon in space before it
crashed with space debris. A Householder transformation matrix can be used to calculate the vector that
represents this phenomenon. In rough surfaces, a model named for Oren and Nayar describes the diffuse
variety of this phenomenon. The light that is subject to this phenomenon is fully polarized at Brewster's
angle. Above the critical angle, the "total internal" variety of this phenomenon occurs. Name this optical
phenomenon for which the angle of incidence is equal to the namesake angle, a phenomenon commonly
contrasted with "refraction" that can commonly be observed in mirrors.
ANSWER: reflection [do not accept or prompt "refraction"]
The Bergeron diagram method calculates the effects of one phenomenon called this which occurs in
electrical circuits. A model named for Lambert is useful for its diffuse type, and Phong shading simulates
the luminance effects related to its specular type. The total internal type occurs above the critical angle,
while another law states that the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of this. For 10 points, identify this
optical phenomenon whose "retro" type reverses the direction of light entirely.
ANSWER: reflection
A constant associated with this phenomenon is found in a relation between molecular
weight, polarizability, and density, the Lorentz-Lorenz equation. A type of this process occurs
when a surface is anisotropic and is known as the double variety, or birefringence. Plane
polarized light does this when an incident ray hits at Brewster's angle. A law of this process
includes the ratio between the speed of light in a medium to that in a vacuum, its "index," and
is named for Snell. For 10 points, name this optical phenomenon in which a change in medium
bends a ray of light.
ANSWER: refraction
The Kerr effect changes the namesake ratio involved in this phenomena in the presence of an electric
field. The lensmaker's equation relates one over the focal length to the focal lengths and the ratio of the
values associated with this phenomena for the lens and the environment. This phenomena can be described
by setting the ratio of the sines of the angles equal to the inverse of the ratio of this phenomena's namesake
indices. That description is known as Snell's law. This is caused by the change of the velocity of a wave as
it enters a new medium. For 10 points, name this phenomena that makes light bend when it enters water.
ANSWER: refraction
A thermal inversion can cause rays to wrap around the earth in the infinite form of this phenomenon.
That difference in temperature can also allow sound to travel farther due to this effect, such as sound
traveling over a lake. This phenomenon is no longer observed once an angle of incidence reaches a critical
angle and causes total internal reflection. One is the minimum value for the index associated with this
effect; that index, denoted n, is equated with angles of incidence via Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a wave changes velocity upon entering a different medium.
ANSWER: refraction
The square of a constant related to this phenomenon is equal to the product of the permeability and
permittivity of a medium. A form of this phenomenon occurring in an anisotropic medium is known as the
"double" variety, or birefringence, whereas total internal reflection is actually another type of this. The ratio
of speed of light in air to that of a material is a coefficient in the trigonometric law of Snellius and is known
as the "index" of this process. FTP, name this "bending" of light rays when changing media.
ANSWER: Refraction
Differences in the magnitude of this phenomenon are used to generate pico-Newton forces to move
microscopic objects in single-beam gradient traps. An alteration to this phenomenon is proportional to the
strength of an applied electric field in the Pockels effect. Alternating layers of dielectrics and metals can
form metamaterials, in which it occurs opposite to the typical direction.The magnitude of this phenomenon
in anisotropic materials depends on the direction of travel, and is called birefringence. The ratio of the sines
of two angles is proportional to the ratio of light velocities, according to Snell's law of this phenomenon.
For 10 points, identify this effect in which light bends as its passes through different media.
ANSWER: refraction
Birefringence is the occurrence along two different axes of this phenomenon, which also causes
mirage images. Snell's law relates the namesake indices of this effect, which can be observed by
putting a pencil partly into (*) water and seeing it appear to bend at the edge of the water. For 10 points,
name this phenomenon in which a wave changes direction when changing medium.
ANSWER: refraction (accept word forms; accept index of refraction; do not accept "reflection" or "diffraction")
The change in a quantity describing this phenomenon is directly proportional to the square of an applied
electric field in the Kerr effect. In anisotropic crystals, polarization of light into ordinary and extraordinary
rays causes the double form of this process, also known as birefringence. One law describing this process
sets the ratio of the sines of the angle of incidence and namesake angle equal to the ratio of two phase
velocities. Dividing the speed of light in a vacuum by the speed of light in a substance yields its namesake
index, which appears in Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this bending of light as it travels through a surface
that separates two media.
ANSWER: refraction
This phenomenon explains why it is easier to hear noises across a lake at nighttime rather than during the
day. This physical process is skewed in people who suffer from keratoconus [keh-rah-toe-KOE-nus] or
astigmatism, and it can be impacted by direction in materials with birefringence [bie-ree-FRIN-jens].
Beyond a critical angle, total internal reflection occurs instead of this wave phenomenon. Name this
phenomenon quantified by Snell's Law, the bending of light as it changes from one medium to another.
ANSWER: refraction (accept word forms such as refract or refracting, do not accept diffraction)
This scientific phenomenon helps explain Fata Morgana. The Fresnel equations describe this phenomenon's
relationship to reflectance and polarization. Certain classes of metamaterials can have a negative value for a
number associated with this phenomenon. A law describing this phenomenon was derived by Fermat from
his principle of least time, and that law indicates that the ratio of phase velocities in two media are
proportional to the sine of the angle of incidence to this phenomenon's namesake angle. For 10 points, name
this optics phenomenon described by Snell's Law, in which light bends because of a change in medium.
ANSWER: refraction
When this phenomenon occurs at two different angles at once, it is called birefringence. One formula
describing it, which can be derived from Fermat's principle of least time, uses the ratio of the speed of light
in a vacuum to that in a medium, this phenomenon's namesake "index." The angle of a beam undergoing
this phenomenon is related to the angle of incidence by Snell's law. It explains why objects in water appear
to bend at the water's surface. For 10 points, name this bending of light rays.
ANSWER: refraction
The negative type of this phenomenon can be found in left-handed materials whose permittivity and
permeability are both less than zero. Birefringence is sometimes known as the "double" type of this
phenomenon. Its namesake law, which is often written as n-one times the sine of theta-one equals n-two
times the sine of theta-two, is better known as Snell's law. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a
wave changes direction as it passes from one medium to another.
ANSWER: refraction
The degree to which this phenomenon polarizes light is called Brewster's Angle, and Fresnel's equations
and Huygens- principle govern this process. When a wave passes through an anisotropic material and
decomposes into two waves, birefringence, the double version of this phenomenon, occurs. Snell's law
relates the angle of incidence with the index of this process. The separation of white light into a rainbow as
it passes through a prism is an example of this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this bending of a wave as
it passes through a new medium.
ANSWER: refraction [do not accept "diffraction" or "reflection"]
The Abraham-Minkowski controversy concerns this phenomenon in a dielectric
resulting in electromagnetic momentum. This phenomenon occurs along with
magnetic birefringence in the Voigt effect. Its occurrence in the atmosphere is
related to the apparent altitude from the ground and is the source of turbulence
when observing stars. The ratio of indices associated with this phenomenon
is equal to the ratios of the(*) sines of the angles of incidence. The speed of light
in a particular substance determines that aforementioned index, which is used in Snell's
Law. For ten points, give this term that describes the bending of light as it passes through
different phases.
ANSWER: refraction
Veselago studied one form of this phenomenon which occurs when the dot product of the Poynting vector
and the wavevector is negative. Its negative form is exhibited by left-handed metamaterials, and another
form occurs in anisotropic materials, where it produces extraordinary and ordinary rays, such as in calcite.
The angle at which this occurs appears in Snell's law along with this phenomenon's namesake dimensionless
index. Occurring due to a change in a wave's speed, it makes straws appear bent in water. For 10 points,
name this phenomenon that causes a light wave to change direction.
ANSWER: refraction [accept word forms]
The angle of this action can be considered in terms of what direction particles or waves move towards or
away from the normal. One law that can be used to figure out the angle of this action includes the sine of
the angle of incidence. By taking the speed of light in a vacuum over the speed of light in a medium, the
index of this action in that medium can be found. For 10 points, name this bending of light that is featured
in Snell's Law.
ANSWER: refraction
This phenomenon works differently for left-handed meta-materials than for naturally occurring materials. A
variant of this phenomenon sees ordinary and extraordinary rays when viewed through calcite; that example
is known as birefringence, the double form of this. When this phenomenon occurs, one can determine the
angle of incidence from Snell's Law. For 10 points, a straw appears broken when viewing it through a glass
of water because of what phenomenon?
ANSWER: refraction [accept birefringence before mention; accept index of refraction before "ordinary"]
A negative form of this phenomenon may occur when the Poynting vector dot the wavevector is
negative. One quantity important in describing this phenomenon is squared in both the numerator
and denominator of one side of the Lorentz-Lorenz equation. Ordinary and extraordinary rays are
observed in anisotropic materials like calcite, in which the (*) "double" form of this phenomenon
occurs. One law used to describe this phenomenon is derived using Fermat's principle of least time. The
sines of the angles at which this phenomenon occurs are related by Snell's law to values of its namesake
index, defined as speed of light in a vacuum divided by speed of light in a medium. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon in which passing between two media causes a wave to bend.
ANSWER: refraction [accept birefringence due to ambiguities]
Veselago demonstrated that metamaterials with both negative permittivity and permeability may
display this property in the reverse sense. This phenomenon may happen different for oppositely-
handed circular polarizations in the Faraday effect and is said to happen "double" in materials like
calcite, which are (*) birefringent. This phenomenon is modeled by setting the ratio of the sines of the
angles in question equal to the reciprocal ratio of the indices of the media. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon, wherein a change in wave speed results in a change in wave direction.
ANSWER: refraction
A second-order change in the quantity that governs this phenomenon due to an electric field is called the
Kerr effect. A "double" form of this phenomenon creates two rays of different polarizations and is called
birefringence. This phenomenon is described by a law that relates the ratio of the sines of the angles
involved to the reciprocal ratio of the refractive indices; that law is named for Snell. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon, in which the path of a beam of light is bent as it enters a new medium.
ANSWER: refraction
A thermal inversion can cause rays to wrap around the earth in the infinite form of this phenomenon.
That difference in temperature can also allow sound to travel farther due to this effect, such as sound
traveling over a lake. This phenomenon is no longer observed once an angle of incidence reaches a critical
angle and causes total internal reflection. One is the minimum value for the index associated with this
effect; that index, denoted n, is equated with angles of incidence via Snell's Law. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a wave changes velocity upon entering a different medium.
ANSWER: refraction
Victor Veselago demonstrated that the negative type of this phenomenon can happen in materials where the
permittivity and permeability are both negative. In general, the value associated with this phenomenon in a
material is equal to the square root of the product of permittivity and permeability, though the opposite of
the square root is used in metamaterials. The double type of this-known as birefringence-takes place
when this phenomenon depends on the polarization of light. It does not take place beyond the critical angle;
instead, total internal reflection occurs. Name this phenomenon, quantified by Snell's Law, in which light
passing from one medium to another bends.
ANSWER: refraction [accept word forms; do not accept "diffraction"]
In a highly publicized 2004 incident, a Penn State team debuted a device that used a "bellows
bounce" resonator to effect this process using sound waves. One cycle used to effect this process was
patented by Albert Einstein and Leo Szilard, and it can also be done by completely reversing the (*)
Carnot cycle. However, this process most often involves a vapor-condensation cycle using Freon or other
CFCs. For 10 points, name this process of transferring heat from an enclosed space to the warmer outside
environment, which is used in a common kitchen appliance.
ANSWER: refrigeration [or word forms like refrigerators; do not accept "cooling" or other near-synonyms]
The magnetic type of this process was discovered in 1881 by Emil Warburg. The first artificial form was
produced by William Cullen, who created a vacuum over a container of diethyl ether. Leo Slizard invented
a machine for this process that contains no moving parts and named it after Einstein. If compressed air is
available it may be accomplished by the reverse Brayton cycle, but in a majority of households it is
accomplished by the reverse Rankine cycle. The vapor-compression cycle is often employed to lower
temperatures by removing heat in, FTP, what process that is frequently accomplished by a device with a
"freezer" section?
ANSWER: Refrigeration (prompt on "Cooling" or "Air-conditioning")
A closed-cycle, regenerative form of this device that has an ideal theoretical efficiency uses a
compressor piston and a displacer, as well as an inert gas, and is based on the Stirling cycle.
Another type of this device uses phase separation between a concentrated helium-3-rich phase
floating on top of a dilute helium-4-rich phase for operation. The coefficient of performance for
these devices is equal to Q-sub-C over quant. Q-sub-H plus Q-sub-C. Szilard and Einstein
designed an absorption type of these devices with no moving parts. Most modern types of these
devices use a vapor-compression cycle and a circulating fluid, being essentially a heat pump that
transfer heats from objects to the surrounding. For 10 points, name these devices that keep their
contents cool.
ANSWER: cryorefrigerator [or cryogenic freezer; or air conditioner; or cryocooler until "cool" is read; or obvious equivalents; prompt on heat pump or heat engine]
In his book Open Sky, Paul Virilio formulates the discipline of dromology as an application of this
discipline's principles to human life. This discipline's hole argument was discussed at length by the "three
Johns" and asks whether substantivalism is a valid theory. In a discussion about privileging a certain
quantity over others that are vitally necessary to us, Luce Irigaray argues that the central statement of this
study is sexed. This study's founder formulated the Mach principle to explain the necessity of inertia.
Alternatives to this idea include Brans-Dicke theory. The inauguration of this theory dismissed the notion
of a single "absolute space" and was partially introduced in the paper "On the Electrodynamics of Moving
Bodies." For 10 points, identify this branch of physics concerned with space and time whose central
equation is energy equals mass times the speed of light squared.
ANSWER: relativity [or relativistic mechanics, or relativistic physics; accept general relativity and special relativity; prompt on "physics"]
Competitors to one theory by this name include the Rosen bimetric theory and Brans-Dicke theory.
One consequence of that theory is that the Kerr metric is needed to apply the Lense-Thirring effect to
the ergosphere of a rotating black hole. Another type of this theory applies to standard Newtonian
mechanics, stating that one can translate problems between inertial reference frames. Yet another
employs the Lorenz transformations and predicts effects like time dilation. For 10 points, give the term
modified by the words Galilean, general, and special.
ANSWER: relativity [accept general relativity before "Newtonian"]
An early attempt at developign this technique came from Abraham and Lorenz's attempts to create a
classical theory of the self-interacting electron. This technique exists in several varieties, including "bare,"
as well as a variety that employs Feynman diagrams with counterterms and is known as the perturbation
varity, and one scheme for setting the counterterms is known as the minimal subtraction scheme. Ken
Wilson applied this concept to statistical mechanics to develop his theory of second order phase transitions,
and Gerard t'Hooft showed that gauge theories have this property by employing a related technique called
regularization. For ten points, identify this operation which in quantum field theories is used to remove
singularities.
ANSWER: renormalization
One quadruply-eponymous scheme for this procedure is named after Bogoliubov, Parasiuk, Hepp, and
Zimmermann, while other schemes for this procedure are the on-shell and minimal-subtraction schemes, and
it leads to the effect of running coupling constants. The first step in it is called regularization, methods of
which were developed by Wilson and 't Hooft. This mathematical procedure is made necessary because
when one integrates over all possible momenta and energies in the loops of Feynman diagrams for vaccum
polarization and self-energy, the integrals are infinite. FTP, name this procedure used in quantum field
theory that absorbs divergent quantities into redefined physical quantities so as to cancel out infinite terms.
ANSWER: renormalization
This results from phonon interactions in simple metals. Joule heating is caused by this, while Wheatstone
bridges are used to find unknown values for this quantity. The thermal form of this quantity is equal to the
length of the material over the conductivity times the cross-sectional area. "Drug" this occurs when
pathogens become able to survive exposure to certain drugs, rendering those drugs obsolete. Drag is
sometimes called this of air. Name this term, the electrical type of which measures of the degree an object
opposes the flow of an electrical current, measured in ohms.
ANSWER: resistance
In solid-state physics, a dimensionally-equivalent "sheet" version of this quantity is often
reported as its value "per square". Its quantum is equal to h over e squared, and the Drude model
gives this extensive quantity as inversely proportional to the product of carrier number density and
mobility. A complex version of this quantity includes a term equal to frequency times inductance.
The power dissipated in a circuit equals (*) current squared times this value. Voltmeters work by
applying a very large value for this quantity in parallel. Devices that provide this quantity are marked with
a series of colored bands and symbolized with a zig-zag line. For 10 points, name this quantity set equal to
voltage over current in a law named for Ohm, who also names its SI unit.
ANSWER: resistance
Thevenin's theorem states that any circuit can be modeled by an equivalent circuit that contains only a
voltage source and a value of this quantity. In metals, this quantity increases with temperature, while the
opposite is true in semiconductors. It can be obtained in a series circuit by adding all of the individual
values for each component of the circuit, and it is the inverse of conductance. Components designed to add
this quantity to circuits are often made of two metal leads and a carbon body, usually identified by colored
bands. For 10 points, name this electrical quantity, the ratio of voltage to current across a component,
measured in ohms and usually symbolized R.
ANSWER: resistance [prompt on "impedance"]
This quantity's "sheet" variety can be calculated using the Van der Pauw method, and the von
Klitzing constant is defined in units for this quantity. This quantity is proportional to density and
length, and is inversely proportional to cross-sectional area. Determining it in a series combination
will always yield a (*) higher total value for it than any individual value. The unit for this quantity is
described in terms of volts per ampere, as it is calculated as the potential difference across a conductor
divided by the current. For 10 points, identify this quantity measured in ohms, which can be thought of as
the opposition to electrical flow.
ANSWER: electrical resistance [prompt on R]
The Wheatstone bridge can be used to find an unknown instance of this quantity, whose inverse is
measured in siemens. The power dissipated across a conductor is equivalent to the current squared
times this quantity, to which reactance must be added to find its AC equivalent, (*) impedance.
Voltage equals current multiplied by this quantity according to Ohm's law. For 10 points, name this
quantity measuring opposition to the flow of current. ANSWER: electrical resistance
The presence of this property causes Joule heating. For a model in which this property is absent,
Bardeen, Cooper, and Schriffer won a Nobel Prize. The absence of this quality leads to the expulsion of
magnetic fields in the Meissner effect. For a conductor, this quantity is equal to length divided by
cross-sectional area times conductivity. For 10 points, name this quantity, equal to voltage divided by
current according to Ohm's law, and absent in superconductors.
ANSWER: electrical resistance
The time constant is equal to inductance divided by this value, and one formula for this quantity
gives it as rho ("row") times length divided by cross-sectional area. The complex inverse of this
quantity is called admittance, and (*) impedance is the complex value of this quantity for AC circuits.
Thevenin's Theorem states that all circuits are equivalent to ones with only a source of voltage and a source
of this, and it is equal to voltage divided by current. For ten points, name this quantity measured in ohms,
the ability of a circuit element to oppose the passage of electrical current.
ANSWER: resistance (or impedance before mentioned)
Leon Chua theorized this property's current-dependent analogue in 1971; in 2008, scientists at HP used thin
films of titanium dioxide to make a two-terminal device governed by that "memory" variety of it. Devices
named for Carey Foster or Kelvin can accurately measure small values of it using a setup like the
Wheatstone bridge. This real analogue of reactance and real part of impedance quantifies thermal
dissipation of energy, and equals the quotient of voltage and current. For 10 points, identify this quantity in
circuit elements governed by Ohm's Law and measured in ohms, the inverse of electrical conductance.
ANSWER: electrical resistance [prompt "R;" prompt "memristance" or "memory resistance" until "memory variety" is read]
At low temperatures, phonon scattering causes this quantity to decrease as the fifth power of
temperature. An increase in this temperature due to coupling with impurities is the Kondo effect. This
quantity is the real part of the impedance. The power dissipated through a wire equals this quantity times
the current squared. It is proportional to the ratio of the length of a wire to its cross-sectional area. It is
equal to voltage over current by Ohm's Law. For 10 points, name quantity measured in ohms and denoted
R.
ANSWER: resistance [prompt on R]
For an electrical component envisioned by Leon Chua, this quantity depends on previous values, indicating
that electrical components can have a memory for this quantity. Predictions for this quantity are too low in
AC circuits because of the Skin Effect. In AC circuits, this is the real quantity added to the reactance to
calculate the impedance. This quantity is equal to a material-dependent constant times length divided by
cross-sectional area and by Ohm's law, it is equal to voltage over current. For 10 points, name this quantity
whose SI unit is the ohm, which measures a circuit element's opposition to the passage of current.
ANSWER: resistance
At low voltage, Esaki diodes exhibit a negative differential of this quantity. Carey Foster developed a
device to measure its value when it is very low; that device's more simple form is the Wheatstone [*]
bridge. When this value is zero in an object, it exhibits perfect diamagnetism; in alternating current circuits,
an imaginary part called reactance is added to this concept to create a complex value called impedance. For
10 points, what property of circuits is defined as the ratio of voltage and current and is measured in ohms?
ANSWER: resistance [do not accept "resistivity"]
The product of one form of this quantity and the junction depth j is plotted against concentration on
Irvin's curves; that is its "sheet" form. This quantity decreases when photons hit a cadmium sulfide
cell. The quantum of this quantity is equal to the ratio of Planck's constant to the square of the
elementary charge, which is a constant named for von Klitzing. This quantity is proportional to the
(*) length and inversely proportional to cross sectional area, and this quantity times I squared gives the
power radiated in Joule heating. The derivative of voltage with respect to current gives this quantity,
according to the most general form of Ohm's law. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in Ohms, the
inverse of conductance.
ANSWER: resistance
According to the Bloch-Gruneisen formula, this quantity increases linearly with temperature in
metals. The skin effect causes an effective increase in this quantity at higher frequencies. The
presence of this quantity introduces (*) damping into an LC circuit. This quantity is proportional to the
length of a wire and inversely proportional to the square of its radius. The voltage in a circuit is equal to
current times this quantity according to Ohm's law. For 10 points, name this quantity with units ohms that
measures how much something opposes the flow of a current.
ANSWER: electrical resistance (accept resistivity; accept impedance)
The relationship between temperature and this quantity is given by the Steinhart-Hart equation. Tunnel
diodes have a negative value for this quantity, whose changes are measured by the most common type of
strain gauge. The proximity and skin effects cause increases in this quantity with increasing frequency. The
time constant tau is equal to indudctance divided by this quantity in an RL circuit. An unknown value of this
quantity can be determined with a Wheatstone bridge. This quantity is the real part of impedance in AC
circuits, and it is equal to voltage divided by current. For 10 points, name this opposition to the flow of
current that is measured in ohms.
ANSWER: resistance
This quantity is given as the sum of terms constant, linear, quadratic, and fifth-power in temperature by
Matthiessen's rule, and this quantity decreases exponentially with temperature in intrinsic semiconductors.
Under high-frequency alternating current, this quantity is higher for several conductors in close proximity
than for one conductor alone due to current crowding, and it is increased by the skin effect. For 10 points,
name this quantity, which is zero for superconductors, and which Ohm's law gives as voltage over current.
ANSWER: resistance
Values of this property diverge near absolute zero, the first observed example of asymptotic freedom. The
von Klitzing constant is written in the units of this property, which can be measured very precisely because
of the quantum Hall effect. Three known quantities of it can be used to measure an unknown fourth in the
Wheatstone bridge circuit. Its generalized complex form, which includes an imaginary reactance term, is
called impedance. It equals voltage over current. For 10 points, name this property, measured in ohms, the
opposition to the flow of electricity.
ANSWER: electrical resistance
One manifestation of this phenomenon is the energy difference between the HOMO and LUMO
states in a molecule, and is called the band gap, while its dependence on temperature is described by
Matthiessen's Rule. Materials that have a value of zero for this quantity are subject to the Meissner
effect, and are called (*) superconductors. In circuits, this quantity is additive for two of its namesake
objects in series. Ohm's Law states that this quantity is equal to voltage divided by current. For 10 points,
name this measurement of an opposition to current flow in a material.
ANSWER: electrical resistance
Joule's first law relates this quantity to heat, time, and current squared, and an unknown value for
this quantity can be calculated given three known values using a Wheatstone bridge. It is the inverse
of conductance, and in AC circuits, this quantity, together with (*) reactance, gives the impedance. This
quantity is equal to potential difference divided by current, according to Ohm's Law. For 10 points, name
this quantity, the measure of an object's ability to oppose the flow of a current.
ANSWER: electrical resistance
Solids with a high value for this quantity possess a large bandgap between the valence and conduction
bands. One modification of this quantity is calculated using the reactance, which is used for AC circuits and
is known as impedance. For a wire, it is proportional to length over cross-sectional area, and power
dissipated can be calculated as current squared times this quantity. The inverse of it is known as
conductance, and one law gives voltage as the product of current and this quantity. For 10 points, name this
quantity measured in ohms.
ANSWER: Resistance [do not accept "Resistivity"]
Only for certain circuit components is its differential form, equal to the slope of the U-I graph, equal
to its more common formulation. Eddies in nearby magnetic fields are generated by other nearby
alternating currents in the proximity effect, which increases this quantity. Below the Debye temperature,
it decreases as temperature to the fifth, since it arises from scattering off phonons. Generally, it is
proportional both to a wire's length and the reciprocal of its cross-section. For 10 points, give this
quantity, the reciprocal of conductance and measured in ohms, equal to the ratio of the voltage to the
current.
ANSWER: resistance
A Wheatstone bridge can be used to determine an unknown value for this quantity, which equals the real
part of the impedance. This quantity is multiplied by the square of current to find power. It is multiplied by
capacitance to find the time constant for one kind of DC circuit. If circuit elements generating this quantity
are connected in series, an equivalent value of it is the sum of individual values. For 10 points, name this
quantity that, by Ohm's Law, equals voltage divided by current.
ANSWER: resistance
The Trouton-Rankine experiment showed that this physical quantity was independent of orientation with
respect to the ether drift. Resonant tunneling diodes often exhibit negative values for this physical quantity.
The Joule heating law gives the power dissipated in a conductor as the current squared times this quantity.
This quantity is the multiplicative inverse of conductance. It increases when a certain circuit element is
placed in series combination and decreases when in parallel combination, and Ohm's law states that it is
equal to the voltage divided by the current. For 10 points name this quantity, a measure of opposition to
current flow.
ANSWER: electrical resistance [do not accept "resistivity"]
A variable amount for this quantity can be achieved by using a rheostat. Unknown values for this
quantity can be measured with a Wheatstone bridge. This quantity is inversely proportional to
cross-sectional area and directly proportional to length. AC circuits use an analog of this concept called
impedance. Deriving it from Ohm's law yields the relation "voltage over current." For 10 points, name this
quantity defined as the amount of opposition to electric current, measured in ohms.
ANSWER: resistance
The Steinhart-Hart equation models differences in this property at different temperatures. Materials that
exhibit this property have a large "band gap" between the valence band and an upper band. Electrical
components that vary in this property can be distinguished by a series of striped bands on the component.
This quantity across a conductor equals voltage divided by current. The AC equivalent of this property is
symbolized "Z," and is called impedance. For 10 points, name this property related to voltage and current
by Ohm's law, which has units of ohms and measures opposition to the flow of direct electrical current.
ANSWER: resistance [accept insulator or word forms before "striped bands"]
This property diverges in metals with magnetic impurities as the temperature tends to absolute zero, an
example of asymptotic freedom known as the Kondo effect. The von Klitzing constant observed in the
quantum Hall effect takes the units of this electrical property, and allows for it to be measured extremely
precisely. A braided Litz wire must be used to counter this property's increase in AC circuits due to the skin
effect. In AC circuits, this is the real quantity added to the reactance to calculate the impedance. For 10
points, name this electrical property whose SI unit is the ohm, which measures a circuit element's
opposition to the passage of current.
ANSWER: resistance
The quantum hall effect gives rise to the von Klitzing standard for this quantity, which is negligible in
materials exhibiting ballistic transport. Negative in tunnel diodes, this quantity is directly proportional to
length and inversely proportional to cross-sectional area. In AC circuits, its effective value is increased by
the proximity and skin effects. For linear loads, power equals the square of current times this quantity.
Reactance is added to this quantity to obtain an analogous quantity for alternating current, the impedance.
For 10 points, name this quantity equal to voltage over current, which is measured in ohms.
ANSWER: electrical resistance [accept specific electrical resistance before "tunnel diodes"]
One method to measure this quantity using two different meters is known as four-terminal sensing. The
alternating current analogue of this quantity depends on phase and is represented by a capital Z; that
quantity, generally expressed using complex numbers, is impedance. In addition to being dependent on the
type of material, this quantity varies directly with the length and inversely with the cross-sectional area of
the material. The reciprocal of this quantity is measured in siemens and known as conductance. Give this
quantity equal to voltage divided by current and typically measured in ohms.
ANSWER: electrical resistance [prompt on impedance before it is mentioned]
Joule's first law relates this quantity to heat, time, and current squared, and an unknown value for this
quantity can be calculated given three known values using a Wheatstone bridge. The inverse of
conductance, in AC circuits this quantity together with reactance gives the impedance. This quantity is
equal to potential difference divided by current, according to Ohm's Law. For 10 points, name this quantity,
the measure of an object's ability to oppose the flow of a current.
ANSWER: electrical resistance
The increase in this quantity due to high frequency caused by Foucault currents manifests itself as the skin
effect. Cooper pairs appear when this quantity goes to zero. The reciprocal of this quantity is measured in
siemens, and, when working with AC circuits, it is known as impedance. A circuit consisting of four of its
namesake devices with a galvanometer in the middle, known as a Wheatstone Bridge, can be used to
measure this quantity. Joule's First Law states that current squared times this is equal to power. For 10
points, name this electrical quantity which, when multiplied by current, yields the voltage drop across its
namesake device.
ANSWER: resistance [accept impedance until "siemens"]
The Kondo effect describes this quantity's divergence at low temperatures. Strain gauges operate by
detecting changes in this quantity, because it is proportional to length and inversely proportional to cross-
sectional area. Its AC-circuit extension is the complex quantity impedance, and its inverse, measured in
siemens, is the conductance. Equal to voltage divided by current, according to Ohm's law, it is high for
insulators and low for conductors. For 10 points, name this measure of how much an object opposes electric
current.
ANSWER: electrical resistance [prompt on resistivity]
Magnetic impurities lead to a log temperature term in the equation for this quantity at low
temperatures. This quantity can be negative for a tunnel diode within its operating region. This
quantity is quantized in units of Planck's constant divided by the square of the electron charge. For
thermal conduction, the temperature difference divided by the heat flux gives the thermal form of
this quantity. For a material with a uniform cross-section, this quantity is proportional to the (*)
length of the material divided by the cross-sectional area. This quantity adds normally in series, but not in
parallel. Electric power equals current squared times this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity which
is the constant of proportionality between voltage and current in Ohm's Law, which is measured in ohms.
ANSWER: resistance [accept resistivity before "length"]
The sum of the squares of this property and of reactance gives the square of the impedance. This property is
inversely related to its device's conductivity, defined as the current density over the electric field. To find
this property, Samuel Hunter Christie created an array of four devices where one is variable in order to test
a fourth for this, called a Wheatstone bridge. In parallel, the equivalent value for this is the reciprocal of the
sum of the reciprocals of the components. FTP, name this property, the loss of potential energy per unit
charge, the R in RLC series circuits.
ANSWER: Resistance [Do NOT Accept Resistivity]
This quantity is increased in the proximity effect, which results from current crowding in materials that
are close together. This quantity is proportional to the length of a wire and inversely proportional to the
cross section of a wire. The "sea of electrons" effect makes this quantity low in metals. It is equal to
potential over current according to Ohm's (OMEZ) Law, and it is effectively zero in superconductors. For
10 points, identify this measure of a material's opposition to the flow of steady current through it.
ANSWER: electrical resistance
It is greater for lithium-ion than for nickel-cadmium batteries, and tends to increase with use. Mostly due to
the electrolyte between electrodes in an electrochemical cell, it is considered the output impedance for
batteries It explains why the theoretical EMF of a cell, calculated from reduction potentials, will always be
greater than the actual voltage measured across the battery. FTP, name this minimum resistance associated
with any battery when current is drawn.
ANSWER: Internal Resistance (accept output impedance early)
Electron-phonon interactions cause this quantity to increase with temperature roughly linearly in most
metals and to decrease exponentially in semiconductors. It is the ratio between the electric field and the
current density when the material in question is isotropic, and the ideal approximation assumes that this
quantity is zero. A related quantity is calculated by its product with length over cross-section. FTP, name
this electromagnetic quantity, a measure of how strongly an arbitrary quantity of a given material opposes
current flow.
ANSWER: resistivity
For semiconductors, this quantity is given by the reciprocal of fundamental charge times quantity
mobility of electrons times electron density plus mobility of holes times hole density. Scattering of
defects at low temperatures results in an uptick in this quantity according to the Kondo effect. The
skin depth of a conductor is proportional to the square root of this quantity. This quantity can be divided
by thickness to give the sheet form of a related quantity. This quantity is defined as the magnitude of the
electric field divided by current density. Symbolized rho, it is multiplied by length over area to give a more
widely used quantity, which is why it has units of Ohm meters. For 10 points, identify this quantity whose
inverse is conductivity.
ANSWER: electrical resistivity [or specific electrical resistance; do not accept or prompt on "resistance"]
In ballistic transport, the contribution to this quantity from scattering is negligible because the
material is smaller than the mean free path. The Bloch-Gruneisen formula says that at low
temperatures, this quantity depends on a power of temperature and that at a large range of
temperatures, it increases linearly with temperature. Doping a semiconductor (*) reduces this quantity,
which can be added to the imaginary reactivity to get impeditivity, the complex extension of this quantity. It
is proportional to area and inversely proportional to length. It is defined as the ratio of electric field and
current density and has units of ohm-meters. The inverse of conductivity is, for 10 points, what quantity that
measures a material's opposition to electric current?
ANSWER: resistivity [accept resistance because we-re nice even though none of the clues talk about that]
The power created by this circuit element is equal to the voltage squared over its value or equivalently the
current squared times its value. A Wheatstone bridge connects four of these devices, three of known value
and one that is unknown. When these devices are found in parallel with one another, an equivalent value
can be found by adding the reciprocals. In series, these circuit elements can be added directly. For 10
points, name this circuit element that acts against the flow of electrical current, whose namesake property is
measured in ohms.
ANSWER: resistors
One type of these which is able to store information even when current does not pass through it was
a breakthrough application developed by HP labs, and they can be found in parallel with the signals as
opposed to capacitors in high pass filters. Their namesake property decreases with increasing area of
cross section; that property is directly proportional to length, and increases with increasing
temperatures. For 10 points, identify these circuit components, whose namesake property is equal to
voltage divided by current according to Ohm's law.
ANSWER: resistors
A variable one of these can be created by using only two terminals on a potentiometer. Four of these
devices in a square conformation are used to create a Wheatstone bridge. They are often found with
capacitors or inductors in AC circuits. These devices add in series. The voltage drop across one of these
elements can be calculated using Ohm's law. For 10 points, name these circuit elements represented by a
zig-zag line, whose namesake characteristic is measured in ohms.
ANSWER: resistor
These objects create Johnson-Nyquist noise, whose relationship to Joule heating is explained by the
fluctuation-dissipation theorem. Cadmium sulfide can be used to create the "light-dependent" type of these
components. A Wheatstone bridge circuit consists of a pattern of four of these components, whose strength
sums when they are arranged in series. The most common type of them is made from ceramic and has its
characteristic property denoted on colored bands. For 10 points, name these circuit components whose
namesake property is measured in ohms.
ANSWER: resistors [do not accept "resistance"]
The Johnson-Nyquist thermal noise in an ideal one of these devices is approximately white, while the
wirewound variety of these devices are commonly made of nichrome wrapped around a ceramic core. A
rheostat is a variable one of these whose namesake quantity may be adjusted. A potentiometer consists of a
three-terminal one of these forming a voltage divider, while four of these form a Wheatstone bridge. When
these devices are connected in series, their namesake quantity must be added to compute their total quantity.
For ten points, name this circuit component, which is frequently labeled using four color bands and whose
namesake quantity is measured in Ohms.
ANSWER: resistors
Helical grooves in a thin layer of carbon or metal are used in the construction of the film type of
these components, while nichrome (NYE-krome) is used in making the wirewound type. Like
capacitors, a four color band code is used to label these devices. Potentiometers are made from three
terminal ones, and four of these elements are used in a (*) Wheatstone bridge. They are commonly
indicated using a zig-zag symbol. For 10 points, name these circuit components that cause a voltage drop
when a current runs through them.
ANSWER: resistors
The thin film variety of these devices is generally made from Tantalum nitride or nichrome, while the most
popular standard for categorizing them is BS 1852. The gauge factor relates changes in their properties to
strain, allowing them to be used for strain gauges, and a potentiometer contains three of them arranged as a
voltage divider. A ladder of them can make a simple digital to analog converter. They generate zero reactive
power, and four of them can be combined with a voltage and current source to create a Wheatstone bridge.
For ten points, name these devices which are frequently coded using four colored bands and whose
namesake quantity is measured in Ohms.
ANSWER: resistors
MELF ones frequently require metal or carbon films, and vacuum tubes take advantage of the grid type. A
good example of a strain gauge is a Wheatstone bridge of these, which illustrates the utility of Kirchhoff's
rules. On these, black means zero or one, and white means nine or one billion. For 10 points, identify these
circuit components, which can be made by wrapping a metal wire around a ceramic core, whose effects sum
directly in series and as reciprocals in parallel, and which restrict the passage of current through them.
ANSWER: resistors
The Feshbach type of this phenomenon allows for the formation of Bose-Einstein condensates. Huckel's
rule describes compounds that exhibit a form of this phenomenon that creates a delocalized cloud of
electrons that give molecules extra stability. In astronomy, this term can refer to an orbital system
exemplified by Io, Europa, and Ganymede. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that explains why glass
can shatter if it is exposed to the right pitch, which in chemistry, refers to the delocalizing of electrons.
ANSWER: resonance [accept word forms like resonant]
Both tunneling and the shape type of this phenomenon have been used to explain alpha decay. An
application of another type of this physical phenomenon uses a uniform magnetic field to align the
hydrogen atoms in a person's body, and then measures spin-lattice and spin-spin relaxation times.
Another type of this phenomenon occurs when the impedance of a circuit is minimized, and yet
another type occurs when the orbital periods of objects is in a simple ratio. This phenomenon occurs
when the driving frequency equals the natural frequency. Name this term also used to describe
molecular structures with delocalized electrons such as in benzene.
ANSWER: resonance [accept word forms; accept longer answers]
This effect occurs in RLC circuits when the inductor and capacitor cancel each other's effects. Optical
cavities are built to specifically induce this effect in light. In chemistry, bonds that are affected by this
phenomenon are often drawn with a dashed line. This term is used to describe molecules where electrons
shift between bonds, making multiple Lewis diagrams necessary to write out all possible structures. For 10
points, name this physical effect where a wave exhibits larger oscillations at certain frequencies.
ANSWER: resonance
This phenomenon occurs in certain circuits when the parallel admittance is minimized, or when omega
times inductance is the reciprocal of omega times capacitance. This phenomenon is used to keep time using
quartz clocks, and its nameaske frequency for a spring with spring constant k attached to a mass m is root k
over m. A famous example of this phenomenon destroyed the first Tacoma Narrows Bridge; it is caused
when a driving force matches an oscillating body's frequency, such as in a playground swing. Name this
phenomenon that occurs when an object vibrates at its natural frequency, a term which provides the "R" in
the medical abbreviation MRI.
ANSWER: resonance [accept word forms; accept additional information like "vibration"; prompt on standing waves; do not prompt on "waves"]
In quantum mechanics it occurs in shape and Feshbach varieties, and a Laplace one exists between the
orbits of Ganymede, Io, and Europa. For LC circuits it occurs when frequency equals the square root of one
over the product of capacitance and inductance. This phenomenon may have been behind the Tacoma
Narrows Bridge collapse, and it can commonly be seen in driven pendulums. For 10 points, identify this
phenomenon in which certain energies and frequencies excite a system better than others, resulting in a peak
frequency above the normal driving frequency.
ANSWER: resonance
In particle physics, this word names peaks in the cross section of a scattering experiment
corresponding to the indirect observation of short-lived particles. The "width" within which this
effect can take place is equal to the viscous coefficient over the mass, and as that gamma ratio
decreases, this effect becomes more pronounced. In LC circuits, this effect occurs alongside minimum
impedance at one over the square root of (*) inductance times capacitance. The Q-factor can be defined
as the ratio of this effect's associated frequency to the aforementioned width. Via a von Karman vortex
street, this effect destroyed the Tacoma Narrows bridge. For 10 points, name this increase in amplitude that
occurs when an oscillator is driven at its natural frequency.
ANSWER: resonance
For an RLC circuit, the frequency associated with this effect is where impedance is at a minimum.
Substances can be analyzed through a technique that uses the nuclear magnetic form of this effect. That
technique's commonly used medical variant is called MRI. This effect causes the amplitude of a system to
hit a maximum. For a vibrating string, the frequencies of this are multiples of the fundamental. For 10
points, name this effect where the frequency of the input force equals the natural frequency of the system.
ANSWER: resonance
This phenomenon, in conjunction with the emission and absorption of gamma rays, are subject of the
Mossbauer effect. One striking example of this phenomenon is visible at the Bay of Fundy, and this may
cause seiches to form and persist in other bodies of water. Magnetic forms of this phenomenon allow for
several types of imaging, including a kind of nuclear spectroscopy. Galileo was the first to recognize this
phenomenon, which he observed in musical instruments. In physical chemistry, this term denotes the
capability of (*) double bonds to shift in some molecules. Often falsely thought to have caused the fall of
the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, for ten points, identify this term describing the tendency of systems to
oscillate at higher amplitudes at certain frequencies.
ANSWER: resonance
In systems which exhibit this phenomenon, one quantity is given by 2 pi times this phenomenon's
namesake frequency times the energy stored divided by power lost. That quantity is the Q factor.
Microwaves are used to excite electrons in an external magnetic field from lower- to higher-energy
spin states in a form of spectroscopy called electron spin this. In an LC circuit, a quantity named for
this phenomenon is given by 1 over the square root of inductance times capacitance. Ganymede,
Europa and Io participate in a 1:2:4 form of the (*) orbital version of this phenomenon. A form of this
phenomenon induced by vortex shedding is often erroneously implicated in the collapse of the Tacoma
Narrows Bridge. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which the amplitude of an oscillating system is
maximized at its namesake frequency.
ANSWER: resonance
In the helium-electron scattering, the Fano parameter gives the ratio of this type of scattering to
background scattering. The Breit-Wigner distribution characterizes the differential cross section in
scattering that produces these states. In electron-positron annihilation, there exists one of these
phenomena corresponding to the J/psi meson at about 3.1 GeV. In that context, this word refers to
large jumps in scattering cross sections due to intermediate particle states and has a width equal to
have the intermediate's lifetime. In another context, a high (*) Q factor corresponds to a much smaller
width of this phenomenon, and in LC circuits, one over the square root of the impedance times the
capacitance is the angular frequency at which this phenomenon occurs. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a system oscillates with a higher amplitude at certain driving frequencies, responsible
for shattering glass.
ANSWER: resonance (accept resonant states or particles)
This term can refer to a matching between the kinetic energies of two particles and those two particles-
bound-state energy. That type, used to study Bose-Einstein condensates, is named for Feshbach. Another
type formed the Huygens and Kirkwood gaps, and the Laplacian type refers to the integer ratios between the
orbital periods of Io, Europa, and Ganymede. In chemistry, it can be depicted by a double arrow between
contributing forms, and the delocalized electrons that form its eponymous structures stabilize benzene. For
10 points, give this scientific term, which in physics refers to a system's tendency to oscillate more strongly
when driven at certain frequencies.
ANSWER: resonance [accept Feshbach resonance; accept orbital resonance]
The extrasolar planet HAT-P-7 was shown to either be polar or have this property. Along with the angle of
entry, this property of meteor showers like the Perseids explains their high entry speed. Damocles and a few
related high-eccentricity asteroids have this property, making some believe that Damocles is an inactive
comet. This property is used as evidence for the captured nature of a satellite. A planet is observed to be
undergoing this from Earth when that planet is near opposition. This property is indicated by having an
axial inclination greater than 90 degrees. Venus and Uranus have the rotational form of this dynamic. This
property contrasts with direct motion. For 10 points, name this motion in the opposite direction from
Earth's rotation around the Sun.
ANSWER: retrograde motion
Christodoulou showed that these do not increase the area of a black hole's event horizon. The Markov
type of these must have detailed balance and Crook's fluctuation theorem applies to dynamics with the
microscopic form. They have no dissipative effects and no temperature gradients transporting heat,
therefore no spontaneous occurrence has this property. Carnot's theorem applies to engines that have the
property of these processes. Each point in these processes are in continuous equilibrium. For 10 points,
name these processes that permit returning the system to its original state after performing the process.
ANSWER: reversible process[accept word forms]
In magnetohydrodynamics it determines whether or not a magnetic field will diffuse away or remain frozen
in the plasma and its magnetic version is dependent on the velocity and electrical conductivity of a plasma.
It is involved in a solution of the Hagen-Poiseuille equation used to approximate the Darcy friction factor
and the drag coefficient must be a universal function of it. This quantity is highly dependent on the
characteristic length of the region of fluid flow, and is proportional to the ratio of a fluid's inertia to its
kinematic viscosity. When this value is low, it corresponds to a smooth, layered flow. For 10 points,
identify this dimensionless quantity related to the turbulence of a fluid.
ANSWER: Reynolds number
One minus 19.7 divided by this number is proportional to the Strouhal number, which governs
the formation of von Karman streets. For a packed bed, its denominator contains one minus the
voidage. One version of this value is the ratio of magnetic advection to magnetic diffusion. It appears
on the x-axis of a Moody diagram plotted against the Darcy friction factor. This value can be
expressed as the ratio of (*) inertial forces to viscous forces, and is equal to the velocity times length scale
divided by kinematic viscosity. At high values of it, eddies and vortices appear in the flow. For 10 points,
name this dimensionless parameter which determines whether flow is laminar or turbulent.
ANSWER: Reynolds number [or magnetic Reynolds number]
A Hele-Shaw appareatus is used to visualize systems with one extremal value of this quantity, and the
Oseen approximation contains a "one plus cosine theta" term inversely proportional to this quantity. Under
certain conditions, the skin friction coefficient is inversely proportional to the square root of this quantity,
and certain values of this quantity result in the development of Von Karman sheets. From the Buckingham-
pi theorem, ti follows that a model cannot replicate both the Froude number and this quantity due to its
proportion to a characteristic length scale. Low values of this quantity are indicative of laminar flow, while
high values correspond to turbulence. For 10 points, name this dimesionless quantity, the ratio of inertial
forces to viscous forces.
ANSWER: Reynolds number
This quantity defines whether one uses the Colebrook equation or the equation 64 over this quantity
to find the Darcy friction factor. This quantity is found on the x-axis of Moody diagrams, where it is
given as density times velocity times characteristic length, all over mu. This quantity can be derived
by using characteristic velocity and length scales to nondimensionalize the four variables in the Navier-
Stokes equation. Both Stokes's law and the Hagen-Poiseuille equation apply only for small values of this
quantity. It is the ratio of inertial to viscous forces. For 10 points, identify this dimensionless number used
to determine whether a flow is laminar or turbulent.
ANSWER: Reynolds number [or Re]
If a growing 3d disturbance can be found at a given value of this quantity, then a growing 2d
disturbance exists at a lower value of this quantity, according to Squires theorem. If this quantity is
in a certain range, there exists two values of the Strouhal number. If this quantity is used to find a
friction factor, the Hagen-Piseuille equation becomes a solution of the Darcy-Weisbach equation.
When this value is (*) large, the pressure is constant across the boundary layer. This quantity cannot be
small in the vicinity of an infinite cylinder according to Stokes' paradox. High values of this quantity signal
turbulence. For ten points, identify this dimensionless number equal to the ratio of inertial forces to viscous
forces.
ANSWER: Reynolds number
A sharp rise in this quantity is the cause behind acute coronary thrombosis of patients with
atheroma. This quantity appears over 282000 taken to the five-eights power in the Churchill-
Bernstein equation, and this quantity puts an upper bound on the formation of Von Karman streets.
One version of this quantity is inversely proportional to the magnetic diffusivity, and taking the
product of it with the Schmidt number gives the Peclet number. Commonly plotted against the friction
factor in a Moody diagram, this quantity gives the ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces. For 10 points,
name this dimensionless number which characterizes a flow as laminar or turbulent.
ANSWER: Reynolds Number
Narrow-band vortex shedding has been observed at critical values of this quantity, which also leads to high
values of a value named for Strouhal. For similarity between two phenomena, this quantity and the Euler
number must be the same. At high values of this number, von Karman's constant increases slowly with it. It
can also be thought of as a ratio of the kinetic energy to the viscous work done by friction, and the Stokes
equation can be used at low values of it. What is this quantity, a dimensionless number that determines
whether, for 10 points, flow in a fluid is laminar or turbulent, and also determines the ratio between inertial
and viscous drag?
ANSWER: Reynolds number
The meson prefixed by this letter is the vector meson isospin triplet. This letter is used to represent
the weighted sum over the outer product of each possible state with itself for a mixed quantum state,
the density matrix. This letter represents a quantity given by the derivative of charge with respect to
(*) volume, and is proportional to the divergence of the electric field by Gauss's law. It also represents the
ratio between the magnitudes of the applied magnetic field and current density in a material, the resistivity.
This Greek letter is used to represent a quantity measured against water to give specific gravity. For 10
points, name this Greek letter used to represent density.
ANSWER: rho
The relativistic analog of these objects have their motions limited to Killing vector fields or isometric
flows by the Herglotz-Noether theorem. Radar distance is used to describe a relativistic equivalent of
these objects in the Born condition. The motion of these objects are described by the SE(3) group.
The rotation of these objects around a given (*) axis can be visualized with Poinsot's ellipsoid and is
described by Euler's equations. Motion of these objects preserves orientation, which can be described by
quaternions or Euler angles. The distance between any two given points in these objects is constant.
Exemplified by a metal sphere are, for 10 points, what solid objects of a finite size that cannot be
deformed?
ANSWER: rigid bodies [accept rigid body dynamics]
These objects can be described by Goldreich-Tremaine theory, which suggested that sharp
boundaries in these objects result from the chaotic motion of two co-orbiting bodies. They may be
generated when a satellite enters its parent body's Roche ("roash") zone, and like asteroids they may
be detected by stellar occultation. The Cassini (*) division in one of these objects from a 2:1
("two-to-one") resonance with Mimas, an example of a shepherd moon. For 10 points, name these circular
collections of dust found in orbit around bodies such as Saturn.
ANSWER: planetary rings [or planetary ring systems]
These entities generally form inside the Roche limit, and bodies inside that limit will become one of
these unless they are being held together by tensile strength. Rhea was the first satellite discovered to
have these features. One of these entities named after John Couch Adams can be found near
Neptune, and Phobos is predicted to form one of these in 50 million years. One designated (*) "F" is
"shepherded" by Prometheus and Pandora, while one of these entities named Phoebe is tilted at an angle of
27 degrees relative to the other ones of Saturn. They are generally thought to form from the material of the
protoplanetary accretion disc that do not coalesce to form moons. 
For ten points, name these flat, diskshaped collections of small particles orbiting a planet.
ANSWER: planetary rings
The Cassini probe documented a region between the A and F rings of Saturn that bear this man's
name, while another entity with this name is defined by the length of a semi-major axis multiplied by
the cube root of the ratio of a satellite's mass to three times the orbited body's mass, and is sometimes
named for (*) Hill. This man also names a region defined by two equipotentials or the Lagrangian point 1,
wherein stellar matter will pinch off to form another star if exceeded. Multiplying the radius times the cube
root of twice the ratio of a primary's density to a satellite's density will calculate another value named for
this scientist. FTP, name this Frenchman who gives his name to a lobe, as well as to a limit denoting the
distance at which tidal forces will shred an orbiting satellite.
ANSWER: Edouard Roche (prompt on William Hill mentioned)
This scientist moved with his mentor, August Kundt, to the University of Strasbourg. This man's most
famous experiment used a Ruhmkorff coil attached to a Hittorf-Crookes tube, which was covered by
cardboard. This man's wife, Anna Bertha, supposedly exclaimed "I have seen my death!" upon viewing a
picture of herself taken by this man, because her skeleton was visible. For 10 points, name this first Nobel
Prize winner in Physics, a German who discovered X-rays.
ANSWER: Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen
Spectroscopy based on this process can only measure transitions for which delta J equals plus or
minus one. Lorentz transformations among spacetime coordinates correspond to processes of this
type. The matrix describing this process has diagonal cosine terms and antisymmetric off-diagonal
sine terms. A black hole undergoing this process has a ring-shaped singularity, is surrounded by an
oblate ergosphere, and is described by the Kerr metric. Symmetry under this process leads to
conservation of (*) angular momentum by Noether's theorem. Its rate is commonly given in radians per
second, the units of angular velocity. For 10 points, name this process of movement by some angle around
a central point.
ANSWER: rotation
This noun names a technique developed by an Italian physicist for solving problems in Minkowski
space by converting them into related problems in Euclidean space. For a free system, this action can
be visualized using the invariable plane and an ellipsoid. This action is "unstable" for an asymmetric
system when it corresponds to the intermediate eigenvalue of the inertia tensor. (*) Euler's three
equations of motion describe this process for a three-dimensional rigid body. Time derivatives of vectors in
frames undergoing this kind of motion can be expressed using the Coriolis theorem. For 10 points, name
this type of motion in which a body spins about an axis.
ANSWER: rotation [or rolling]
While working at Gottingen, Johann Nikuradse did seminal experiments in varying this quantity
with sands. For open channels, a coefficient named for this quantity is found in the denominator of
the formula for the Chezy coefficient and the denominator of Manning's formula, in both cases also
being called Manning's n. This quantity is divided by about 3.7 times hydraulic diameter in an
equation valid only for turbulent flow that's used to calculate the Darcy (*) friction factor. The relative
form of this quantity is given by dividing its absolute value, represented epsilon, by the inside diameter of
the pipe. It is plotted against the Reynolds number in a Moody diagram. For 10 points, give this measure of
the surface imperfections or irregularities of pipe walls that is disregarded when considering smooth pipes.
ANSWER: internal pipe roughness
One subclass of these stars, d, consists of double-mode pulsating stars, and that subclass is commonly
plotted on Petersen diagrams to analyze the effects of metallicity on their properties. Commonly found in
globular clusters, the luminosities of these Population II stars are typically around forty five solar, and their
periods vary from a few hours to two days. Formerly called cluster Cepheids, FTP, identify this class of
pulsating horizontal branch stars, named for a star in the Lyre.
ANSWER: RR Lyrae variables
Along with Frederick Soddy, this man showed that radioactive elements would spontaneously eject
pieces of atoms. He later created hydrogen by firing alpha particles at nitrogen gas, but is better
known for suggesting to Ernest Marsden and Hans Geiger that they fire (*) alpha particles at other
elements. Those experiments helped this man formulate a model of the atom superseded by the Bohr
Model. For 10 points, name this physicist whose "gold foil experiment" showed the existence of the atomic
nucleus.
ANSWER: Ernest Rutherford
This man was the founding president of the Academic Assistance Council, which helped Jewish
academics leave Nazi Germany. While at McGill University, he and Frederick Soddy developed the
"transformation" theory to explain (+) radioactivity. He supervised an undergraduate project in
which Ernest Marsden observed scattering of alpha particles, and he described the results of that
experiment as if "you fired a fifteen-inch shell at a piece of (*) tissue paper and it came back and hit
you." For 10 points, name this New Zealand-born physicist who showed that the atom must contain a
nucleus.
ANSWER: Ernest Rutherford
This experiment used zinc sulfide (SOUL-fide) as a detector and generated one of its materials from the
decay of radium. It was performed with the help of Marsden and Geiger, and its results were compared to
tissue paper deflecting a bullet. It fired alpha particles at its namesake material, disproving the plum
pudding model in favor of a model that depicted the nucleus as a very small, dense center. For 10 points,
name this experiment which involved a thin sheet of a certain precious metal, conducted by Ernest
Rutherford.
ANSWER: Rutherford gold foil experiment [accept Geiger-Marsden experiment before mention]
While testing this experiment, Ernest Marsden detected particles at angles more than ninety degrees. One
result of this experiment showed that matter was mostly made up of empty space. The setup for this
experiment involved an alpha particle emitter pointed at a thin layer of the namesake element. This
experiment disproved the plum pudding model of the atom and showed the existence of a positively
charged nucleus. For 10 points, identify this experiment conducted by Ernest Rutherford.
ANSWER: Rutherford gold foil experiment [or Geiger-Marsden experiment; or Rutherford gold foil experiment until "Ernest Rutherford" is read]
This experiment used a sheet of zinc sulfide as a detector and its setup is used in a namesake type
of backscattering spectroscopy. Its results disproved JJ Thompson's plum pudding model. This
experiment fired a series of alpha particles at a target, most of which (*) passed straight through but
some of which were reflected at large angles. For 10 points, name this experiment which showed that the
atom mostly consists of empty space, conducted by Ernest Rutherford and named for the target used.
ANSWER: Gold Foil Experiment [or Geiger-Marsden Experiment; or Rutherford Experiment until names are mentioned]
This experiment is sometimes named for the two individuals who actually conducted it, Hans
Geiger and Ernest Marsden. The set-up for this experiment included a circular sheet of zinc sulfide
that lit up when contact was made by alpha particles. Those alpha particles sometimes were (*)
reflected directly back to their source, a result described as "firing a fifteen-inch shell at a piece of tissue
paper and hav[ing] it come back and hit you." For 10 points, name this experiment that discovered the
positively charged nucleus.
ANSWER: Rutherford gold foil experiment [or Rutherford experiment; or Geiger-Marsden experiment before mentioned]
The results of this experiment can be described with an equation which sets cross section to be
inversely proportional to the fourth power of sine theta over two, times kinetic energy squared. Its
namesake used it to predict the atomic masses of copper and platinum. This experiment used the
radioactive decay of radon gas to produce helium (*) nuclei. In it, Geiger and Marsden counted spots on
a zinc sulfide screen, prompting its namesake to exclaim that it was as if tissue paper had deflected a 15-
inch shell. For ten points, name this experiment which disproved the plum pudding model and discovered
the nucleus, conducted by Ernest Rutherford.
ANSWER: Rutherford gold foil experiment (accept Rutherford experiment before mention; accept Geiger-Marsden experiment before mention)
This experiment used a zinc sulfide screen attached to a microscope as a detector. The incident particles
for it were generated from the decay of radon. This experiment was used to disprove the plum pudding
model. Its results were compared to "firing a howitzer at tissue paper and having it reflect back at you." For
10 points, name this experiment that used alpha particles to show that an atom contains a central nucleus,
performed by a British physicist.
ANSWER: Rutherford's gold foil experiment [or Geiger-Marsden experiment; or Rutherford experiment]
A circular arrangement of zinc sulfide screens was used to detect particles in this experiment. Geiger
and Marsden carried out the work of this experiment, in which a sample of radon was placed in a
lead box with a hole from which (*) alpha particles were fired at a thin metal sheet. Backward scattering
was observed in, for 10 points, what experiment that disproved the plum pudding model, leading to the
discovery of the atomic nucleus by Ernest Rutherford?
ANSWER: Ernest Rutherford's gold foil experiment (accept Geiger-Marsden experiment, before mentioned; prompt on Rutherford experiment before mentioned)
This physicist names atoms that feel a van der Waals attraction or repulsion to one another that scales as
the eleventh power of the principal quantum number. Those atoms make up a type of matter that does not
interact with light because it does not have any vibrational transitions in the IR range. His constant can be
found by multiplying the square of the fine structure constant by the rest mass of the electron and the speed
of light and dividing by two times Planck's constant. A principle named for Ritz and him states that it is
possible to find pairs of spectral lines whose wavenumbers sum to an observed spectral line. For 10 points,
name this physicist who derived a formula for finding the spectral lines of hydrogen-like atoms that was
explained by the Bohr model.
ANSWER: Johannes Robert Rydberg
This man names a type of matter in which ions with circular orbits are suspected in a delocalized
sea of electrons. This man names highly excited, approximately hydrogenic electronic states. He is the
first namesake of a principle which says that some spectral lines are the sum or difference of others.
His constant is equal to one-half of the hartree energy, or about 13.6 electronvolts. One of his
namesake equations, which can be used to predict the (*) Lyman and Balmer series, sets reciprocal
wavelength equal to his constant times the difference in inverse squares of initial and final principal
quantum numbers. For 10 points, name this man who developed that equation to validate the Bohr model of
the atom and explain electronic transitions in hydrogen.
ANSWER: Johannes Rydberg
This thinker posited that dreams are recollections of past lives in order to explain why so many myths
involve the title creature in his book The Dragons of Eden. He criticized Immanuel Velikovsky for misusing
science in Broca's Brain. This man's wife Ann Drulyan compiled his Gifford Lectures into The Varieties of
Scientific Experience. This man was one of the five TTAPS authors that wrote A Path Where No Man
Thought, which warned against nuclear winter, a term he coined. This man's Pale Blue Dot is a sequel to
his most notable work, a miniseries of thirteen episodes that traces the history of the order of the universe.
For 10 points, identify this popular scientist who narrated Cosmos and who authored the novel Contact.
ANSWER: Carl Sagan
This man suggested the ratio of brain size to body mass is an effective way of measuring intelligence in
his The Dragons of Eden. This man's wife Ann Druyan wrote one section of his book Pale Blue Dot. A
remake of a work narrated by this man is hosted by Neil DeGrasse Tyson and brings back the spaceship of
the imagination. Who is this physicist and science popularizer, the host of the original Cosmos series?
ANSWER: Carl Sagan
This constellation contains the Lagoon Nebula, the Trifid Nebula, and the Omega Nebula, otherwise known
as its titular triplet. It is home to the greatest number of stars with planets detected around a star as well as
the greatest number of Messier objects. The closest elliptical galaxy to the Milky Way is located in it and is
expected to collide within a hundred million years. The stars Ninki and Kaus Australis form two corners of
the Teapot, a bright asterism. FTP, name this constellation which is home to the densest part of the Milky
Way and the center of the galaxy.
ANSWER: Sagittarius (accept Archer)
A dwarf elliptical galaxy in this constellation is the second-nearest to the Milky Way. An H II region
in this constellation consists of both an open cluster, an emission nebula, a reflection nebula, and a
dark nebula; that region is the Trifid Nebula, which along with NGC 6559 and the (*) Lagoon Nebula
makes this constellation's namesake "triplet." One feature in this constellation is a radio source at the center
of the galaxy, possibly a supermassive black hole; that feature is near its border with Scorpius. For 10
points, name this constellation representing an archer.
ANSWER: Sagittarius
In 1999, a violent outburst from the direction of this constellation was at first thought to have
revealed the closest black hole to Earth. Its namesake triplet consists of the Lagoon Nebula, the
Omega Nebula, and the Trifid Nebula. It lies between the center of the (*) Milky Way and the planet
Earth, and it is home to a star formation known as the teapot. For 10 points, Rukbat is the brightest star in
which constellation often depicted as a centaur holding a bow and arrow?
ANSWER: Sagittarius
One method of attitude-controlling these devices is via gravity-gradient stabilization, which typically
requires that an extended boom be present. The destruction of these devices may eventually lead to an
ablation cascade, as proposed by Kessler. Over the course of their lives, these devices consume their "delta-
v budget", and once that budget is almost over, they may be graveyarded. These devices must perform
station-keeping maneuvers when located in low Earth orbit. The GPS constellation features 32 of these
devices. For 10 points, name these manmade objects that are launched into space, the first of which was
Sputnik.
ANSWER: artificial satellites [or rockets; or spacecrafts; or spaceships]
As imaged by the Hubble telescope, a huge storm recurs in a band near its equator in the Northern
Hemisphere every 30 years, and it is unique in having a warm polar vortex. One of its moons has sufficient
geyser activity to eject water vapor onto this planet and slow down the rotation of plasma in its atmosphere,
and it may produce some of its heat via friction as helium atoms escape from its core. One of its moons is
the only one in the solar system with a dense atmosphere, and Pandora and Prometheus are among its
shepherd satellites. For 10 points, name this planet orbited by moons like Enceladus, Phoebe, and Titan,
with the Encke gap and Cassini Division in its rings.
ANSWER: Saturn
The Great White Spot refers to a series of storms periodically appearing on the surface of this
planet. Christiaan Huygens was the first to discover one of its moons, and with another scientist he
lends his name to a spacecraft studying it. It is the only planet in the solar system that is less dense
than water, and its moons include (*) Iapetus, Janus and Rhea. Its most notable feature has a gap known
as the Cassini Division. For 10 points, name this planet which is orbited by Titan and possesses an extensive
ring system, the sixth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Saturn
Associated with the Hindu Navagraha, Shani, this body is unique in that it contains a warm polar
vortex, and in its southern hemisphere one can find the Dragon Storm. Its largest satellite is the only
moon in our solar system to have a dense atmosphere; other, smaller satellites include Phoebe,
Tethys, and (*) Iapetus. About every 30 years it is home to the Great White Spot, and it is the only planet
in our solar system less dense than water. The Encke Gap and Cassini Division are found in the most
notable features of, for 10 points, what 6th planet in our solar system that is orbited by the moon Titan as
well an extensive ring system?
ANSWER: Saturn
Water plumes were observed on a geologically active moon of this planet, which is also probably the
most reflective object in our Solar System. The Great White Spot is sometimes present on this planet.
Prometheus and Pandora are two shepherd moons around this planet. The least dense planet in the
Solar System, it is less dense than water. Another moon of this planet is the only satellite known to
have a dense (*) atmosphere, which is composed mainly of nitrogen. The Cassini-Huygens mission is
studying this planet and its largest moon, Titan. For 10 points, name this gas giant best known for its
extensive rings, the sixth planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Saturn
One of this planet's moons was described by NASA scientists in May 2011 as "the most habitable spot
beyond Earth in the Solar System for life." That description of a moon of this planet came after discovery of
a sodium rich icy plume. This planet's largest moon is notable because it contains methane in its
atmosphere, indicating a source of methane on its surface, which may be related to its hydrocarbon lakes.
That moon of this planet is the only moon in the Solar System home to a significant atmosphere. This planet
was visited by the Cassini-Huygens mission, and its most famous feature is home to the Cassini Division
and maintained by shepherd satellites. For 10 points, name this planet orbited by Titan which is famous for
its rings.
ANSWER: Saturn
The magnetosphere of this planet is comparatively weak, as shown by Pioneer 11 and Voyager 2
flybys. This planet's largest moon was landed on by the
Huygens [HOY -gens] probe. This is the least (*) dense planet in the solar system, with a density of less
than 1 gram per cubic centimeter. The Cassini gap separates the A and B rings of, for 10 points, what
second largest planet in our solar system?
ANSWER: Saturn
One of this planet's moons has a ridge that goes about halfway around it, and that moon is white as snow on
one side and darker than asphalt on the other. Some of its moons are classified into the Gallic, Norse, and
Inuit groups. Its largest moon, which has hydrocarbon lakes, was the landing spot of the Huygens [HOYgens] probe. 
Plumes of ice come from its moon Enceladus [en-suh-LAH-dus], while the orbit of its moon
Mimas [MIE-mus] is responsible for the gap between the Cassini [kah-SEE-nee] Division and its B Ring.
Name this gas giant which is orbited by Titan and which is the sixth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Saturn
One prominent meteorological phenomenon in this planet's northern hemisphere was observed in 1933 by
Will Hay, and two moons of this planet which features the Great White Spot are the only co-orbital
satellites in the solar system. The first spacecraft to observe this planet was Pioneer 11, and although it is
the least dense planet in the solar system, one moon of this planet is known for its dense atmosphere. The
Huygens probe landed on this planet's largest moon Titan. For 10 points, name this second-largest planet in
the solar system that is notable for its ring system.
ANSWER: Saturn
A classification known as the Inuit Group contains five of these objects named for Inuit gods. One of
these bodies is theorized by Kieffer to produce cryovolcanic effects via a clathrate mechanism, and
another of these bodies has a giant crater that makes it look like the Death Star. The only irregular one
of these objects is Phoebe. The largest of these bodies is the only moon known to have a dense
atmosphere. For 10 points, name these objects including Enceladus, Mimas, and Titan, all of which orbit
the second-largest planet in the solar system.
ANSWER: Saturn's moons [accept equivalents like Saturn's satellites; prompt on moons or similar answers that do not mention Saturn]
One of these objects has a 400 kilometer wide impact crater named after Odysseus and a 2000
kilometer long valley called Ithaca Chasma. Another of these objects has the highest albedo of any
Solar System object, and bears cracks in its surface known as "tiger stripes" that spew out water-ice
particles near its cryovolcanically active south pole. Ontario Lacus and Kraken Mare are on the
largest one of these object, and are theorized to be (*) hydrocarbon lakes. That largest object also has an
atmosphere consisting of 98% nitrogen exerting 1.5 atmospheres of pressure at its surface. Many of them
were visted by the Cassini spacecraft. For 10 points, name these objects that include Tethys, Mimas, and
Titan.
ANSWER: moons of Saturn [prompt on "moons" or "(natural) satellites"]
Edouard Roche theorized that objects travelling inside the Roche limit could have formed this structure,
which contains the moons Prometheus and Pan. Its outermost section contains the Encke [EN-kay] gap.
James Maxwell showed that it was a not a solid continuous structure but rather composed of many small
individual objects. This structure contains a 3,000 mile wide gap called the Cassini Division. For 10 points,
name this system of icy-like objects that are found around the sixth planet from the sun.
ANSWER: rings of Saturn [or obvious equivalents; prompt on rings; prompt on Saturn]
A form of this phenomenon that includes quasiparticles like magnons is named for Brillouin. For
spherical particles of intermediate size, the Mie model of this phenomenon applies. The cross-section
for one form of this process is given by the Klein-Nishina formula; that form features a transfer of energy
to an electron by a high-energy photon, while an elastic model is named for Rayleigh. Another example of
this phenomenon came when Rutherford bounced alpha particles off a gold nucleus. For 10 points, name
this optical phenomenon in which radiation assumes multiple trajectories.
ANSWER: scattering
One perturbative solution to this kind of problem takes the form of an infinite series of Feynman
diagrams that diverges. When finding an approximation for this kind of problem in the case of long
wavelengths, the exponential term simply vanishes and all that must be integrated is the interaction
potential; that is a special case of the Born Approximation. In quantum mechanics, this kind of
problem usually is solved by finding the associated (*) amplitude of a wave, given that a plane wave
encounters a potential and is transformed into a spherical wave. Classically, this type of problem is typically
solved by finding the namesake angle given the impact parameter. For 10 points, name this kind of process
in which a particle changes direction after a collision.
ANSWER: scattering [accept collision]
When this is caused by phonons, the impact is comparable to a diffraction grating and the type is named
after Leon Brillouin [bree-yone]. Another type of this is similar to fluorescence in that it involves an
inelastic collision, but it does not involve resonance. That type is used for remote sensing, while a different
type is used to explain the dispersion that makes the sky blue. This phenomenon in xrays is used to find the
structure of crystals with Bragg's law. Give this phenomenon that has types named after Rayleigh and
Raman [rah-mahn].
ANSWER: scattering
The differential cross section for two types of this phenomenon is given by the Klein-Nishina formula. One
of those types is named for Thomson, while the other results in the decrease in energy of an X-ray or
gamma ray photon. Reflections that do not undergo this phenomenon are known as specular. One inelastic
kind of this process has Stokes and anti-Stokes varieties, while an elastic type acts on the sun's light to
produce diffuse sky radiation and explains why the sky is blue. For 10 points, name this deviation in the
trajectory of a beam of light, which has types named for Compton, Raman, and Rayleigh.
ANSWER: scattering
One method for solving this type of problem assumes the potential is spherically symmetric and expresses
the solution as a sum of partial waves. Solving this type of problem entails finding the angle in terms of the
impact parameter. The square of the namesake amplitude of this process is equal to the differential cross-
section. The resulting intensity of one form of this process is inversely proportional to the fourth power of
the wavelength, leading to the blue color of the sky. For 10 points, name this general process in which a
particle or a wave interacts with an object and deviates from a straight trajectory, which has a variant named
for Rayleigh.
ANSWER: scattering
This phenomenon can be used to detect heavy metal impurities in a type named for
Rutherford, and accelerating particles emit radiation in a form named for Thomson. The Tyndall
effect involves particles in a colloid causing this phenomenon, and an inelastic form of this is
named for Raman. An energy drop in photons interacting with matter is the Compton type,
while another form occurs with particles of radii much smaller than the wavelength of light. For
10 points, name this phenomenon, the Rayleigh type of which explains why the sky is blue.
ANSWER: scattering
The differential cross-section of particles undergoing one type of this process at the lowest order is
given by the Klein-Nishina formula. This process happens to particles in the Cosmic Microwave
Background Radiation that move through hot gas, resulting in the (*) Sunyaev-Zeldovich
(SOON-yuh-eev ZELL-doe-vich) effect. The Compton form of this process is inelastic, while the Raman
form of it is elastic. The Rayleigh form of it partially explains why the sky is blue. For 10 points, name this
physical process in which radiation deviates from a straight path.
ANSWER: scattering
One equation important to understand this process is derived by rearranging the Schrodinger
equation and then adding an i times epsilon term to a denominator because E minus H sub zero is
singular. One operator important in understanding this process has poles corresponding to bound
states and maps in-states to out-states. One quantity important in describing it can be found using the
partial wave expansion, and in this process the (*) incident waves are assumed to be plane waves in the
Born approximation. The square of the amplitude of this process gives the magnitude of d sigma d omega.
The hard-sphere variety of this process has an angle-independent differential cross section. For 10 points,
name this process in which a particle bounces off another and changes direction.
ANSWER: scattering
One type of this process is the basis for a kind of spectroscopy and has Stokes and anti-Stokes varieties. In
addition to the Raman kind of this phenomenon, one inelastic type causes the wavelengths of x-rays and
gamma rays to decrease. An elastic type caused by particles in the air makes the sky appear blue. For 10
points, name this phenomenon with varieties named for Compton and Rayleigh, in which radiation deviates
from a straight trajectory.
ANSWER: scattering
One type of this phenemoneon is divided into Stokes and anti-Stokes varieties, and another is a solution for
electromagnetic equations described by the Klein-Nishina formula in addition to having a namesake "edge"
and wavelength. Mie theory is a solution to the Maxwell equations for these processes and the S-Matrix is
used to describe them. In addition to the Raman and Compton varieties, the Rayleigh variety explains why
the sky is blue. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, in which radiation is deflected by its medium.
ANSWER: Scattering (Take Raman scattering or Compton scattering until they are mentioned)
One specific type of this process is dependent on spherical particles. In addition to that type named
for Mie, another type of this process occurs when there are time-dependent density variations in a
material, and is named for Brillouin. If x-rays undergo this process and speed up, this process is named
after Sunyaev and Zeldovich, and if the x-rays slow, it is named after Compton. When this happens to a
photon inelastically, it is named after Raman. For 10 points, name this process, the Rayleigh type of
which explains why the sky is blue.
ANSWER: scattering [do not accept any specific form of scattering]
Noble gas atoms and a type of it are involved in the Ramsauer-Townsend effect while the Heyney-
Greenstein function models it based on albedo. The interaction of laser and sound waves causes the
Brillouiin type while photons are the subject of the Delbuck variety. This process is either coherent or
incoherent based on the reemission frequency and the simplest type is dubbed Mie. A more famous kind is
caused by an excitation of photons while the most famous kind explains why the sky blue. Raman and
Rayleigh are two forms of, for 10 points, what process where particles are sent into different trajectories.
ANSWER: scattering
This process is represented by the S-matrix in quantum mechanics and when it involves spherical
particles it is described by Mie theory. The cross section for one of these processes is given by the
Klein Nishina formula. One inelastic process of this type used in spectroscopy generates (*) stokes
and anti-stokes lines, while an elastic process of this type with a dependence on the fourth power of
wavelength is responsible for the sky's blue color and is named for Rayleigh. For 10 points, Raman and
Compton are types of what process in which particles interact and bounce off at some angle?
ANSWER: Scattering [accept scattering of photons of light or electromagnetic waves]
One type of this phenomenon involves a namesake frequency shift in the gigahertz range. A non-relativistic
variety in which the cross section is 8/3 pi r squared is known as the Thomson variety. The average cross
section is given in terms of the angle between initial and final polarizations by the Klein-Nishina formula
for another form of this phenomenon. In dealing with this phenomenon, the Born approximation is
sometimes employed. One elastic type of this phenomenon is named after Lord Rayleigh. FTP, name this
spreading out of radiation in particle physics, the inelastic form of which is dealt with in the Compton
effect.
ANSWER: Scattering (accept Brillouin scattering before end of first sentence)
Multiple instances of this phenomenon cause Kikuchi lines to appear in TEM. Interactions with phonons
cause the Brillouin form of this phenomenon, which is described by Mie theory. The Klein-Nishina formula
governs this phenomenon, one type of which has Stokes and anti-Stokes forms and is named for Raman.
Another elastic type named for Thomson is the low-energy version of the Compton form of this
phenomenon. The color of the sky is a result of the Rayleigh form of this phenomenon. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon in which particles are deflected from originally straight paths.
ANSWER: scattering
His 1944 book What is Life? introduced the term "negentropy" and discussed the idea of an
"aperiodic crystal" which contained genetic information, a concept which later inspired Watson and
Crick to research the structure of DNA. In his 1926 paper, Quantization as an Eigenvalue Problem,
he published an equation describing the time- and space-dependence of quantum mechanical systems,
using a model of the atom as waves rather than particles. Later, he rejected the mainstream
definition of wave-particle duality altogether, promoting the wave concept alone. This led him to
propose a (*) thought experiment to demonstrate the absurdity of wavefunction collapse. FTP, name this
Austrian-Irish physicist whose namesake thought experiment involves a vial of poison, a decaying atom,
and a cat.
ANSWER: Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrodinger
This man wrote the essay "Mind and Matter," in which he asserted the oneness of mind in order to resolve
the arithmetical paradox. The relativistic Klein-Gordon equation is a form of his namesake equation, which
can be simplified using the Born-Oppenheimer approximation. This author of What is Life? illustrated the
problem of the Copenhagen interpretation in an experiment involving a hammer, a radioactive source, a
Geiger counter, and a flask of poison. For 10 points, name this physicist whose namesake equation
describes how the wave function evolves over time, and whose namesake thought experiment involves a
simultaneously dead and alive cat.
ANSWER: Erwin Schrodinger
This man demonstrated that electrons could be modeled as standing waves trapped in a potential, and
demonstrated that momentum and energy could be found as eigenvalues. Those eigenvalues were solutions
to a namesake equation that equated the Hamiltonian and energy operators of the wave function and became
a fundamental formula of quantum mechanics. He also devised a famous thought experiment that introduced
the concept of entanglement. For 10 points, name this Austrian physicist whose theoretical cat, until
observed, may be either alive or dead.
ANSWER: Erwin Schrodinger
The solutions to an equation named for this man can be found with the Hartree-Fock method. In its
time-dependent form, that equation replaces the eigenvalue E with I h-bar times the time partial
derivative of the wavefunction. This scientist criticized the Copenhagen interpretation by discussing
the collapse of many possible quantum states into a single state. In a (*) letter addressed to Albert
Einstein, this physicist discussed a Geiger counter and a vial of hydrocyanic acid sealed in a box with an
animal which might be alive or dead. For ten points, name this Austrian physicist who had a namesake
thought experiment involving a cat.
ANSWER: Erwin Schrodinger (accept Schrodinger equation or Schrodinger's cat)
An equation named for this man can be solved by using a trial solution to calculate the potential, which is
then used to calculate a new trial solution, at which point the process is iterated. That method works for
many-electron systems and is called the self-consistent field method. That namesake equation relates the
time derivative of the wavefunction to its Hamiltonian, thus describing the time evolution of quantum
systems. This scientist also names a thought experiment involving a Geiger counter that can detect the decay
of a single particle. For 10 points, name this Austrian physicist whose thought experiment deals with
quantum states in a live (or dead) cat.
ANSWER: Erwin Schrodinger
This scientist's prediction of an aperiodic crystal containing genetic code inspired Watson and Crick, who
had read his book What is Life? A PDE named for this physicist includes a multiplicative minus h-bar 
squared over 2 mu times Laplacian plus potential energy term. That is the one-particle case of an
equation stating i h-bar d-psi dt equals Hamiltonian times the wavefunction, this man's namesake time-
dependent equation. One of this man's thought experiments attacks the Copenhagen interpretation of
quantum mechanics by considering a box containing a Geiger counter and vial of poison. For 10 points,
identify this physicist whose namesake cat is both dead and alive.
ANSWER: Erwin Schrodinger [or Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrodinger]
This man's work with color is less famous than his other work, and he also wrote My View of the World and
The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. He won the Nobel Prize for a namesake equation predicting a
dynamic system's future behavior which also gives three quantum numbers. This author of Nature and the
Greeks and What is Life? corresponded with Einstein and developed a thought experiment involving a
hammer and a flask of prussic acid that continued his work with wave equations and also involved the
superposition of life and death. FTP, name this Austrian winner of the 1933 Nobel Prize known for his
namesake equation and cat.
ANSWER: Erwin Schrodinger
In the many-worlds interpretation, this scientist's namesake equation holds in all locations and at all
times; that equation describes the evolution of quantum states over time and can be written as "E psi
["sigh"] equals H-hat psi." He developed a concept involving a (*) box containing a poison that can be
released by radioactive decay. For 10 points, name this "father of quantum mechanics" whose namesake
thought experiment involves a cat.
ANSWER: Erwin (Rudolf Josef Alexander) Schrodinger
This man's most famous paper may be his "Quantization as an Eigenvalue Problem", in which he developed
an approach to determine energies of hydrogen-like atoms. That approach relies on an equation he names
stating that i h-bar times the time derivative of a function is equal to that function's Hamiltonian. A thought
experiment named for this man involves a Geiger counter's detection of an alpha particle causing poison to
be released, so the central animal is simultaneously alive and dead. For 10 points, identify this Austrian
namesake of a famous wave equation and a thought experiment involving a cat.
ANSWER: Erwin Schrodinger
Solutions to this equation for a periodic system can be combined according Bloch's theorem.
One method of solving this equation for an N-body system is to select a trial function and then
use the variational principle in order to iterate the choice. Another method to solve this equation
decomposes a Hamiltonian into a zeroth-order part and adds a quantity V, which is the
perturbation theory named for Rayleigh and this equation's namesake. Solvable with the Hartree-
Fock method, it can be written as E psi equals H psi in its time-independent formulation, and
solving this equation for the hydrogen atom gives orbitals. For 10 points, name this fundamental
equation of quantum physics, used to define the wavefunction, that is named for a German.
ANSWER: Schrodinger equation
This equation is used to derive the probability continuity equation. The derivation of this
equation relies on plugging a plane wave into the energy-momentum relation. This equation for a
constant V transitions from exponential to oscillatory solutions. Methods of solving this equation
include one in which a solution near a turning point is solved as an Airy function, and one in which a
trial solution is inputted and the variational method is applied. Those are the (*) WKB and
Hartree-Fock method. Solving this equation for a radially symmetric potential gives the orbitals of the
Hydrogen atom, and the time-independent version of this equation is written as H psi equals E psi. For 10
points, name this central equation of quantum mechanics, named for a German.
ANSWER: Schrodinger equation
The Dirac equation reduces to this equation applied to a non-zero electric field and a zero magnetic field,
and this equation has a relativistic version called the Klein-Gordon equation. The WKB method
approximates solutions to this equation and is used in tunneling, and this equation is easily solvable for an
infinite square well and a harmonic oscillator in its time independent form. For 10 points, identify this
equation that relates the time derivative of a wave function to its Hamiltonian, the central equation of
quantum mechanics, which was named for an Austrian scientist with a thought experiment about a cat.
ANSWER: Schrodinger equation
When it is subjected to electromagnetism, a p minus qA squared term replaces the original p squared term.
The WKB approximation can be used to approximate solutions to this equation. One extension of this
equation describes it in terms of bispinors; that equation, the Dirac equation, is a relativistic version of the
Pauli equation, which extends this equation for particles with a spin of 1/2. It has both time-dependent and
time-independent forms that depend on the Hamiltonian. Name this equation which describes how a
wavefunction changes with time, the fundamental equation of quantum mechanics.
ANSWER: the Schrodinger equation
Making a complex exponential ansatz transforms the Hamilton-Jacobi equation into a variant of this
equation, which is a diffusion equation with imaginary diffusion constant. Its electronic form is used in the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation and can be in turn solved using the Hartree-Fock method. Solutions to
this equation satisfy local conservation of probability and must be normalizable. The Klein-Gordon and
Dirac equations are Lorentz-invariant alterations of it. The time-independent form of this equation contains
an energy eigenvalue E. For 10 points, name this equation written "i h-bar d psi d t equals H psi," an
equation from quantum mechanics whose solutions are wavefunctions.
ANSWER: Schrodinger equation
In the interaction picture, this statement is modified by Tomonaga and Schwinger. Up to constant
real factors, this equation differs from the heat equation by a factor of i. When viewed non-
relativistically, propagators are the Green's functions for this equation. The most general form of
probability current conservation is a corollary of this equation. (*) Solving one form of this equation
yields the energy spectrum of a quantum system. This equation equates i h-bar times the time derivative of a
wavefunction with the Hamiltonian of the wavefunction. For 10 points, name this equation that describes
the evolution of a quantum state, whose developer also posited a thought experiment about a superposition
of living and dead cats.
ANSWER: Schrodinger equation
A variant on this concept includes a video camera and an internal television. Objective collapse
theories attempt to resolve this apparent paradox by setting size or complexity criteria. It was
intended as a critique of the Copenhagen interpretation, and featured a (*) hammer triggered to
release and break a flask of hydrocyanic acid if an atom decays. For 10 points, name this thought
experiment in which, until the box is opened, a superposition of live and dead states is the best way to
describe the title creature.
ANSWER: Schrodinger's cat
This experiment was proposed as a reaction to an article written by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen
about the strange nature of quantum entanglement. It illustrates the problem of The Copenhagen
Interpretation applied to everyday objects, and it attempts to illustrate the paradox that occurs when
subatomic particles are not in a definite state. In it, an atom's random radioactive decay causes the
breaking of a vial of poison. For 10 points, name the thought experiment involving a living creature that
may or may not be dead.
ANSWER: Schrodinger's cat
Its conclusions have been used to propose a novel method of detecting wire taps, in which a tapped message
will be detectable because it will be different at each end of the transmission. Its creator intended to criticize
the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory, and it may have contributed to the development of the
competing many-worlds theory. The setup involved an amount of radioactive material so small that, with
equal probability, either one or zero atoms of it would decay within one hour. If an atom did decay, it would
set off a Geiger counter that would destroy a bottle containing poison. FTP, identify this thought experiment
involving a box holding the titular animal, which may or may not be dead.
ANSWER: Schrodinger's cat experiment
Eugene Wigner extended it by adding a friend who acts as an intermediary, describing
the result to the titular person when he returns to the lab. This thought experiment was put
forth as a macroscopic demonstration of the seemingly impossible concept of eigenstate
presented by the Copenhagen interpretation. Further analysis of this thought experiment gave
rise to the concept of quantum entanglement. Put forth by its namesake Austrian physicist, this is
for ten points what thought experiment involving a box, a flask of hydrocyanic acid, and a
namesake feline?
ANSWER: Schrodinger's cat
Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates can be used to show that the supposed singularity here is not physically
realized, and Flamm's paraboloid can be used to visualize the curvature outside it. Stable circular orbits
can exist only at distances three times greater than it, and the radial coordinate becomes timelike within it,
meaning that all worldliness there must tend towards the origin, meaning that it defines the event horizon.
For 10 points, name this distance associated to a namesake non-rotating spherically symmetric black hole
which is the distance to which a certain mass must be compressed for it to form a gravitational singularity.
ANSWER: Schwarzschild radius
It appears in the denominator of its namesake's exact solution to Einstein's field equations for the
gravitational field outside a non-rotating, spherically symmetric body. This quantity, equal to two times
mass times big G over c squared, along with the Chandrasekhar limit marks one of two requirements
necessary for the formation of a black hole. Relatively large for stars, it is conversely tiny when dealing with
primordial black holes. For 10 points, name this quantity delineating the surface of the event horizon in a
non-rotating body, the distance from the center of an object such that, if all of that object's mass were
compressed within that region, the escape speed would equal the speed of light.
ANSWER: Schwarzschild radius [prompt on gravitational radius]
Kip Thorne's Hoop Conjecture was a precursor to the existence of this entity, which has its artificial
singularity removed in Kruskal-Szerekes coordinates. The photon sphere exists at 1.5 times this
quantity for non-rotating entities. In the general relativistic derivation of this quantity, its
namesake's solution to (*) the Einstein Field equations becomes infinite at this value. This quantity can be
derived by taking the expression for the escape velocity from a mass and setting it equal to the speed of
light. Equal to two G M over c squared, this is, for 10 points, what length that a mass must be compressed
inside in order to become a black hole?
ANSWER: Schwarzschild Radius
An effect named for this physicist is non-perturbative since the virtual particles involved tunnel out of
the Dirac sea. A correction due to this physicist was derived to explain the measurement of hyperfine
splitting in gallium by Kusch and Foley. That effect results in pair production when a vacuum is subjected
to an electric field on the order of ten to the sixteen volts per centimeter. That correction gives the
anomalous magnetic moment of the electron as the fine structure constant divided by two pi. He developed
the method of renormalization. For 10 points, identify this physicist who was awarded a Nobel, with
Feynman and Tomonaga, for his work on QED.
ANSWER: Julian Seymour Schwinger
This quantity squared is equal to one kilogram times one meter divided by one Newton. This unit is
equal to one farad times one ohm, and is the inverse of one Hertz. It is now conventionally defined in
terms of vibrations of a (*) cesium atom, as opposed to its original definition which pertained to the speed
of light. The most common unit for velocity is meters divided by, for ten points, what most basic unit of
time, 3600 of which are in an hour?
ANSWER: Second (prompt on Time)
One named for Cassini suggests that a moon maintains a constant angle of inclination with respect to
its ecliptic. (*) Kirchoff's indicates that the sum of the electrical potential differences around a closed
circuit must be zero and is called his loop rule. Another rule referred to by this phrase is examined by
exergy efficiency and was realized when Carnot noted the relationship between work and heat in a system.
Mendel's indicates the independent assortment of allelic pairs, and yet another notes that an astronomical
bodies sweeps out equal areas in equal time, as determined by Kepler. For 10 points, give this common term
for a statement by Newton that F=ma.
ANSWER: second laws
An analogous version was first detected by employing the spin Hall effect, while at temperatures
around one-fifth of the Debye temperature, this effect can arise from phonon drag. Its result is
complementary to the Nernst effect, since this effect depends on all dissipative processes that aren't
vortex motion, probably because it is governed by a special case of the (*) Onsager relations. Also
produced by charge carrier diffusion, it results from a combination of four emfs, two each named for
Thomson and Peltier. For 10 points, identify this effect, the operating principle behind thermocouples, in
which a temperature gradient generates a voltage.
ANSWER: Seebeck effect
For infrared light applied to molecules adsorbed to metals, the surface version of these statements
predicts three distinct forms of Raman spectral behavior. Processes that violate these statements are
generally derived by finding the expected value of the off-diagonal matrix elements of a system's
Hamiltonian similar to finding the first order perturbation energies between two different states. The
symmetry of that is then used to find where the expected value is non-zero to determine these
statements. In the dipole approximation for a hydrogen-like atom, these statements imply that
angular momentum must change between two different states. (*) Fermi's Golden Rule gives the rate
for the processes that these statements apply to, and Laporte names one of these. Transitions between two
states that violate these are called forbidden. For 10 points, name these quantum mechanical rules that
govern what transitions are possible.
ANSWER: selection rules [accept transition rules before mention of "transition"; prompt afterwards]
In general, these statements can be found by inspection by considering that the symmetry of the
integrand in the transition integral is the direct product of the symmetries of the transition moment
operator, and the conjugate-initial and final wave functions, as that symmetry dictates when that
integral is zero. For hydrogen-like atoms one of these exists for all multipoles against the case in
which the initial and final states have zero total angular momentum; consequently, transitions between such
states do not occur. Transitions subject to one of these are known as allowed or forbidden. For 10 points,
name these quantum mechanical strictures that dictate when a transition is possible.
ANSWER: selection rules [prompt on transition rules]
One property of a structure formed by two of these materials may be calculated as the difference in
the electron affinities by Anderson's rule; those structures were suggested for use in lasers by
Herbert Kroemer. These materials are maximally efficient light emitters if the top and bottom of two
structures describing these materials occur for the same value of the Fermi wave vector. Amorphous
examples of this type of material form interfaces with (*) insulators and feature localized and extended
states separated by a "mobility edge." They may be classified as N or P type based on their mobile charge
character. These materials are also characterized by the size of the energy difference between their valence
and conduction bands. For 10 points, name these materials that have resistance between that of resistors and
conductors.
ANSWER: semiconductor [prompt on diode before "MOSFET"; prompt on transistor before "thyristor"]
A distribution function given for these materials is proportional to temperature raised to the three halves
power and a constant equal to about 4.83 times ten to the twenty first power. Because of diffusion, parts of
these materials can reach an equilibrium like state called a depletion region. Examples of these materials
which are pure are called intrinsic and include mercury cadmium telluride. Depending on how they are
modified, they can be called p or n type and have modified Fermi levels indicating a shift in their band gap.
Gallium arsenide is a common example of these materials which have their properties altered through the
introduction of impurities in a process called doping. For 10 points, name these materials that have
properties between an insulator and a conductor.
ANSWER: semiconductor
The diffusion of particles in these materials was measured in the Haynes-Shockley experiment. These
materials have a small band gap between their conduction and valence bands. Impurities called dopants can
be added to these materials, which include silicon carbide and gallium arsenide. Transistors are made of
these materials, which come in n and p types. For 10 points, name these materials whose electrical
conductivity is between that of insulators and conductors.
ANSWER: semiconductors
A cat's-whisker detector consists of a thin wire touching this kind of material, which is also found in
quantum dots. A lack of phonon emissions characterizes an indirect band gap in these materials, sometimes
the location of depletion regions. These materials are subject to a process that involves the addition of
elements such as boron or gallium to introduce additional energy states in the band gap; that process is
called doping. Popular examples of these materials include zinc oxide and gallium arsenide, although most
electronic devices use silicon-based ones. For ten points, name these devices with a conductivity between
that of an insulator and conductor.
ANSWER: semiconductors
The first of these type of materials was discovered by Michael Faraday in 1833 when he was studying the
properties of silver sulfide. Frenkel excitons generally form in these materials when they are exposed to
photons that have energies in or near the visible range of the spectrum. These materials observe an increase
in resistivity when they are cooled, unlike metals such as copper. Graphite behaves like one of these
because of its extensive pidelocalization, allowing access to conduction bands. Conductivity of these
materials is modified by doping. For 10
points, name these materials which have a resistivity between that of conductors and insulators.
ANSWER: semiconductors
The planar process was invented to manufacture things out of one of these materials. The most
popular method for producing boules of one type of this material is the Czochralski process. If
certain consecutive energy minima and maxima do not lie at the same momentum value, phonons
must mediate generation and recombination processes in these materials, and they are classified as
indirect. Adding impurities to these materials changes them to extrinsic and is done with a process called
doping, which adds energy levels to their band gap. Its dominant type used commercially is silicon;
transistors and solar cells are created with them. For 10 points, identify these materials that have a
conductivity intermediate between that of conductors and insulators.
ANSWER: semiconductors [or silicon wafers until "silicon" is read; prompt on crystals]
These substances exhibit Shockley-Read-Hall and Auger [oh-ZHAY] recombination. One type has a
temperature dependence governed by Fermi-Dirac statistics. The intrinsic type has a small but non-zero
band gap between the valence and conduction bands. Charge carriers in these materials include both
electrons and holes. Their Fermi levels change after adding boron or phosphorous impurities through
doping, producing their p and n types. Used in diodes and solar panels, some examples include germanium
and silicon. For 10 points, name these materials with conductivities between those of conductors and nonconductors.
ANSWER: semiconductors
In these substances, an energy level with a 50% chance of being occupied by an electron, known as
the Fermi level, is found within the band gap. These substances work by the generation and
recombination of charge carriers, including free electrons and electron (*) "holes." Adding group 3
and group 5 elements to a lattice of group 4 atoms can create the p- and n-types of these substances in a
process known as doping. Found in electrical components like diodes and transistors, they often are
composed of silicon. For 10 points, name these substances with conductivity intermediate between that of
an insulator and a conductor.
ANSWER: semiconductors
One section of these materials is known as the depletion zone. These materials are characterized by
a small gap between the Fermi level and the valence band. Impurities are added to these materials in
order to create either extra electrons or electron holes in the N- and P-types of these materials,
respectively. That process is called (*) doping. These materials, such as germanium and gallium arsenide,
are used in electronic devices such as diodes and transistors. For 10 points, name these materials, such as
silicon, that have electrical conductivity in between that of a conductor and an insulator.
ANSWER: semiconductors
Due to collisions with the surface of one of these materials, an important reduction in mobility occurs in
inversion layers. If a minimum does not occur at the origin of an E-k plot for these materials, phonons must
participate in radiative transitions, making them indirect. These materials are degenerate when a difference
of less than 3kT exists between the conduction band and the Fermi level. They can be compensated if there
are an equal number of donors and acceptors. These materials are classified as extrinsic when doped. For
10 points, identify these materials with intermediate conductivity that include silicon and germanium.
ANSWER: semiconductors
Small gaps occur between the Fermi level and the valence band in these entities, and they exhibit Auger
[pronounced "oh-ZHAY"] recombination. Both electrons and holes carry charge in these devices, and their
N and P types can be made through a process in which relatively electron-rich or -deficient compounds are
added to a metal; that process is called doping. Unlike many metals, their conductivity increases with
temperature, and a naturally occurring example is silicon. For ten points, name these substances found in
transistors with conductivity between that of conductors and insulators.
ANSWER: semiconductors
When heated, adatom pair chain structures form compact islands on the surface of one of these
objects. A "compound" one of these objects is a likely source of solar cells. Ion implantation is used to
create extra electrons or an "electron hole" in these objects in a process called "doping," which results
in the n and p types of these objects. The most common of these objects is elemental silicon. For 10
points, name these materials with intermediate conductivity, prevalent in integrated circuits.
ANSWER: semiconductors
A 1977 Nobel Prize was awarded to Nevill Mott for his work on the amorphous type of these materials,
and the extrinsic type of them comes in n and p varieties. They possess "electron holes" after impurities are
added to them in a process called "doping," and these materials are often crystalline solids. Examples of
these materials include germanium and silicon. For 10 points, identify these materials which possess
electrical conductivity between that of an insulator and that of a conductor.
ANSWER: semiconductors
Calculations for the behavior of electrons in these substances assign the electrons an effective mass
that varies inversely with the second derivative of the electric field and has nothing to do with actual
mass. The two carriers in these materials cancel each other out during the recombination process.
These substances used in photovoltaic cells typically have band gaps between 0.1 and 10 electron
volts where no electrons can exist. Some of these materials conduct holes instead of electrons, and
are known as p-type. Name these substances that can be doped to improve efficiency and which are
often based on germanium or silicon.
ANSWER: semiconductors
They can produce photons through a phonon-mediated process known as recombination. The spin-
flip Raman laser consists of one in a magnetic field, and when exposed to an energetic photon,
electrons in the highest occupied molecular orbital of these materials can be excited to the (*) valence
band, leaving behind electron holes. The introduction of electron donators or acceptors can yield the n and
p types, which are subdivisions of the extrinsic type of these materials. Cadmium telluride and gallium
arsenide are examples of, for 10 points, what materials that possess a small band gap between their valence
and conduction bands, allowing for intermediate electrical conductivity?
ANSWER: semiconductors
In situations where these phenomena propagate perpendicular to the direction of flow, the changes between
the upstream and downstream values of parameters such as pressure, density, and temperature are given by
the Rankine-Hugoniot relations. When the collisionless variety of these phenomena propagate outward
through the solar wind, they result in the heating of the surrounding plasma. Their arrival is signaled by
geomagnetic disturbances. These dissipative phenomena also arise in the case of an object moving through
a surrounding medium, such as air, with a Mach number greater than one. For 10 points, identify these
phenomena in which characteristics such as pressure and density change discontinuously across a
propagation, such as when an airplane exceeds the speed of sound.
ANSWER: shock waves
This person is the first namesake of the statement that the current, which varies in time, is equal to
charge times drift velocity, which varies in time, over the length between the two electrodes from
whence the current is measured. That theorem finds wide application in photodetectors and is
named with Simon Ramo. This person is also the first namesake of a recombination process resulting
from the creation of trap levels by impurities or defects, naming it with with William Read and
Robert Hall. He derived an equation that sets the (*) saturation current times quantity exponential of the
ratio of voltage and thermal voltage minus one, end quantity, equal to the current, which is his diode
equation. For 10 points, name this genius best known for "helping" John Bardeen and Walter Brattain
invent
the first transistor at Bell Labs.
ANSWER: William Shockley
This type of algebra is a non-empty collection F of subsets of X such that if A is in F, then so is the
complement of A, and if A-sub-N is a sequence of elements of F, then the union of those An is in F. This
letter also designates a baryon containing a strange quark with the other two quarks being up and/or downs.
In electrodynamics, it is the symbol for the ratio of current density to electric field, also called electrical
conductivity, and in the physics of blackbody radiation it designates the Stefan-Boltzmann constant.
Chemical bonds which lie directly on the bond axis are named by, FTP, which Greek letter whose upper-
case variety means "sum"?
ANSWER: Sigma
A class of baryons with this name consists of combinations of two up and down quarks with the third being
charm, strange, or bottom. A transcription factor with this one-letter designation recruits RNA polymerase
to the promoter region. It represents cross section in nuclear physics, and as the inverse of resistivity, rho,
this letter represents conductivity. The Stefan-Boltzmann constant is written as its lowercase version, which
more commonly represents surface charge density in electrostatics. For 10 points, name this Greek letter,
whose lower-case version represents standard deviation in statistics and whose upper-case version indicates
summation.
ANSWER: sigma
An altered form of this process is described by an equation which includes the additional term e raised to
the negative bt over two m. Acceleration in this process can be calculated as the negative of omega squared
times displacement, and equations multiplying either the square root of I over mgh or the square root of L
over g by two pi describe this process for different devices. For small amplitudes, this process can
approximate the motion of pendulums. For 10 points, name this type of periodic motion exemplified by
springs.
ANSWER: Simple Harmonic Motion [prompt on Harmonic Motion]
One quantity for this phenomenon is calculated as two-pi times the energy stored over the energy
lost, and is termed the quality factor. The square root of a constant k over mass gives the resonant
frequency at which this phenomenon occurs. An example of this phenomenon can be approximated
by replacing the sine theta term with theta for small angles. Its simplest type is described by using
Newton's second law in conjunction with (*) Hooke's law. For 10 points, name this type of motion seen
in pendulums and springs.
ANSWER: simple harmonic motion [or damped harmonic motion; or oscillation or oscillators in place of "motion"; or SHO; or SHM; prompt on resonance]
In quantum mechanics, this phenomenon corresponds to evenly spaced discrete energy levels and a ground
state energy of h-bar omega over two. An extension of this movement to two dimensions traces out a
Bowdith curve, which is also known as a Lissajous [lis-ah-zhoo] figure. This occurs when objects have an
acceleration that varies inversely with the opposite of position. One commonly given example of it is only
an estimation based on a small-angle approximation, which assumes that the sine of theta is approximately
theta. Generally, this happens when freely moving objects are subject to Hooke's Law, as for spring
oscillations. Name this periodic sinusoidal motion that occurs when objects move back and forth.
ANSWER: simple harmonic motion [or SHM; accept simple harmonic oscillation or SHO; prompt on partial answers; prompt on sinusoidal motion]
The Einstein model of solids considers each atom as a quantum mechanical version of one of these systems.
They can be classified using a quantity given by 2 pi times the energy stored over the energy dissipated,
also known as the Q factor. These systems may undergo damping, and the frequency of these objects is
equal to the square root of the stiffness k over mass. Pendulums are an example of these systems at small
amplitudes, and they can be described mathematically by setting Newton's Second Law equal to Hooke's
Law. For 10 points, name these objects, exemplified by a mass on a spring.
ANSWER: Simple Harmonic Oscillators [accept Simple Harmonic Oscillation or Simple Harmoni Motion or SHO or SHM; prompt on partial answer]
One constant associated with these systems is denoted by zeta and is equal to a certain coefficient c
over two times the square root of a constant times mass. If these systems have an intermediate quality
factor they are said to be critically damped. Electrical versions of this system include RLC circuits. When
this type of system is displaced from its equilibrium position, it experiences a restoring force F,
proportional to the displacement x. For 10 points, name this kind of system, examples of which include
springs and pendulums.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator
This type of absorber is used in Smakula's formula relating the optical absorption coefficient to the
concentration of color centers. The treatment of each atom in a lattice in Einstein's model of heat capacity,
and the treatment of each field mode in the blackbody formula of Rayleigh and Jeans, were both based on
this type of system. Allowed states of its quantum analogue can be expressed in terms of Hermite
polynomials and found using ladder operators, starting from a ground state with energy h-bar over two
times the resonant frequency. For 10 points, name this type of system governed by Hooke's law, displaying
periodic, sinusoidal displacement.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator
All bound orbits are closed under the inverse square law and in this system, which are the only two
central force systems with that property, per Bertrand's theorem. An infinite number of equally
spaced energy levels and eigenstate wavefunctions that are proportional to normalized Hermite
functions occur in this system's (*) quantum analogue. The Q value, or quality factor, in these systems is
determined by the ratio of stored energy to the energy dissipated per cycle, and varies inversely with the
damping constant. The equation of motion for the "simple" type of these systems can be derived from
Hooke's law. For 10 points, name these systems that exhibit sinusoidal motion, exemplified by a mass on a
spring.
ANSWER: harmonic oscillators [or answers with prefixes, such as "quantum", "damped", or "simple"; or linear force or Hooke's law until "energy levels" is read]
The solution for one type of this system approximates the Hamiltonian as the product of an operator and
its Hermitian conjugate. The ground state energy for one type of this system equals h-bar times omega over
two, via the solution to the Schrodinger equation. Another type of this system involves a second-order
differential equation, which gives the solution that the position is a sinusoidal function of time. For 10
points, the pendulum and mass-on-a-spring are types of what system that comes in "quantum" and "simple"
types?
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator [or quantum harmonic oscillator; or simple harmonic oscillator]
These systems can be described by the Q factor, and, in one case, the quantity omega-sub-d is used to
solve these systems. One type of these systems can be described by the equation T is equal to 2 times
pi times the square root of m over k. These systems can be damped, and they experience a restoring
force whose magnitude is proportional to their displacement from equilibrium, which is described by
Hooke's law. For 10 points, name these systems exemplified by a mass attached to a spring or a pendulum.
ANSWER: Simple Harmonic Oscillator (prompt on partial answer; prompt on specific simple harmonic oscillators)
Deviations from this type of system causes phonons to have a non-infinite lifetime and is the reason
behind thermal expansion in a crystal. In addition to modeling bond dissociation, the Morse potential
also models deviations from this system. These systems are characterized by a potential possessing
evenly-spaced energy levels and a ground-state energy of one-half times h-bar times omega. When
the second-order linear differential equation that describes these systems is inhomogeneous, they are
said to be (*) "driven." The exponential decay of this behavior is referred to as damping. The potential
energy of these systems is proportional to the square of the displacement from an equilibrium position. For
10 points, name these systems characterized by periodic sinusoidal movement which include springs and
pendulums.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator [or simple harmonic motion; accept "quantum" in place of "simple"]
One quantity defined for these objects is given by 2pi times the peak energy stored over cyclical energy
dissipated, also known as the quality factor. One example of these objects requires the small angle
approximation that sine theta equals theta, and another requires a frictionless surface to avoid damping.
These objects exhibit resonance when they are driven at the right angular frequency, which may be square
root of L over g or square root of k over m for two examples of these objects. For 10 points, name these
objects displaying periodic motion, examples of which include a mass on a spring and a pendulum.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillators [accept SHO or simple harmonic motion or SHM; prompt on pendulum or spring]
These objects can be modeled using the second-degree differential equation a y double prime plus c
y equals zero. In one common example of them, the small angle assumption, that sin theta equals theta,
must be made to analytically solve the equation, while the other common example obeys Hooke's Law
and requires a frictionless surface. For 10 points, the pendulum and mass-on-a-spring systems are
examples of what type of system displaying periodic motion and constant amplitude?
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillators [accept simple harmonic motion; accept SHO; accept SHM; prompt on pendulum; prompt on mass-on-a-spring; prompt on harmonic oscillators]
Normal mode expansion is used to decompose coupled versions of these systems. The quantum version of
one of them has a minimum energy level of h bar omega over two. An electrical example of these systems is
a series RLC circuit. This system becomes more complex if the right-hand side is changed from 0 to a force
term, or if a first derivative term is added to the left side. Those phenomena in this system are called
"driving" and "damping" respectively, and the basic version of this system is developed by equating
Newton's second law with Hooke's law. For 10 points, name this type of physical system that is exemplified
by a mass on a spring.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator
The wavefunction for one of these systems is proportional to the inverse square root of n factorial times two
to the n times a Gaussian times a Hermite polynomial. The Einstein model of heat capacity treats each
individual atom as one of these systems. A particle in a stable equilibrium can be modeled as one of these
systems by Taylor expanding the potential and throwing away all terms after the third one. An RLC circuit
is an example of one of these systems that exhibits damping. In classical mechanics, one type of this system
is characterized by a restoring force whose magnitude is proportional to the distance from equilibrium, a
result known as Hooke's Law. For 10 points, name this type of system, a simple example of which is a mass
on a spring.
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator [prompt on "oscillator," accept more specific answers such as simple harmonic oscillator and quantum harmonic oscillator]
The energy levels of this model are proportional to n plus one-half in its quantum analogue. Using a
Taylor series quadratic expansion, any stable equilibrium can be modeled using the general equation
for one of these systems. RLC circuits are an electrical example of these systems, one case of which
sets omega equal to the square root of the length over gravity; that case uses the (*) "small angle"
assumption. For one of these systems, the square root of k over the mass gives the angular frequency.
Hooke's law can be used to create these systems. A restoring force creates, for 10 points, what systems
which springs exemplify the "simple" type of?
ANSWER: harmonic oscillators (accept simple harmonic oscillator; accept damped oscillator; prompt on "oscillator"; prompt on "spring" or "pendulum")
The ladder operator method is used to analyze the solutions to this system's quantum analogue. Ones
with a time-dependent external force are driven, while ones with a source of external friction are called
damped. These systems famously display both linearity and time translation invariance, and their
solutions frequently invoke an angular frequency proportional to one over the square root of mass.
Springs are common examples of, for 10 points, what system, whose periodic motion centers on an
equilibrium position?
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator
The uncertainty principle explains why one version of this system has a zero point energy of one-half h-bar
times omega. This system will decay to a steady state most quickly when zeta equals one. One example of
this system can be analyzed exactly using elliptic integrals, or approximately using the small-angle
approximation. These systems experience unbounded growth in amplitude if driven at the resonant
frequency, and their motion can be generally described using Hooke's law. For 10 points, name these
systems which experience a restoring force proportional to displacement, exemplified by pendulums and
springs.
ANSWER: simple harmonic oscillator [prompt on spring; prompt on pendulum; accept quantum harmonic oscillator until "elliptic integrals"]
The Fock states of a single mode describe this system, and the operators used to describe second
quantization were originally motivated by this system. Some systems modelled after this one are more
accurately described by a model named for Morse. Inverse square forces and forces that cause these systems
are the only ones that can result in closed orbits according to Bertrand's theorem. The solution to the
Schrodinger equation with this type of potential may be found by power series expansion and given in terms
of Hermite polynomials, but a more elegant method makes use of ladder operators. A small angle
approximation allows one to model a pendulum as one of these. It is defined as having restoring force
proportional to displacement. For 10 points, name this system involving sinusoidal oscillations.
ANSWER: quantum harmonic oscillator [accept simple harmonic oscillator; prompt on "oscillator"; prompt on "Hooke's Law" or "linear force"]
While Archimedes only identified three of them, Heron of Alexandria, as well as many of the
scientists of the Renaissance, listed their number as five. In his work On Mechanics, Galileo became
the first to realize that they do not actually create energy, they can only transform it. One of them
can be constructed with a sheave and a rope, and several utilize the ability to (*) convert torque into a
linear force. Screws, wedges, wheel and axles, pulleys, levers, and inclined planes are all examples of, for
10 points, which non-complex devices that provide a mechanical advantage?
ANSWER: simple machines
Heron of Alexandria lists five of these mechanisms that can "set a load in motion" in his work
"Mechanics". The principle of virtual work may be used to find the ratio of their output force to the
input force. This class of device includes an object named for (*) Archimedes and usually used to
transport water. Archimedes identified three of them, although many modern scientists believe there are six.
When these objects are combined, the product of their individual mechanical advantages gives the new
mechanical advantage. For 10 points, identify this class of object that includes the wheel and axle, pulley,
and lever.
ANSWER: simple machines
Calculations related to one of these systems are dependent on a distance quantity called the pitch, and in one
of these systems, the torque produced by an external force affects a component concentrated closer to the
center of mass. For two of these systems, the ratio of outer radius to inner radius and the ratio of sloped
length over width give the ideal form of a quantity defined as the output force divided by the input force
called mechanical advantage. For 10 points, name these devices which include the pulley, wedge, and
inclined plane.
ANSWER: Simple Machines
A variety of one of these objects is named for Archimedes and usually used to transport water.
One quantity especially relevant to these objects comes in "actual" and "ideal" forms and may be
found as the ratio of (*) resistance force to force applied or input distance to output distance. These
objects all have a mechanical advantage greater than one. For 10 points, name this set of six objects,
including the wheel and axle, wedge, inclined plane, screw, pulley, and lever.
ANSWER: simple machines
Stephen Hawking wrote that "God abhors a naked" one. They are described by theorems named for
Hawking and Penrose, and in a black hole, gravitational forces cause spacetime to have infinite curvature at
this location. Because they exist only at a single point, and have zero volume, they have infinite density.
FTP, name this point found at the center of a black hole.
ANSWER: singularity
The diameter of this object was discovered in 1959 by Robert Brown and Richard Twiss with a stellar
intensity interferometer. Ejnar Hertzsprung suggested that this object was a member of the Ursa Major
Moving Group, and Friedrich Bessel observed the inconsistencies in this object's orbit that led to the
discovery of its companion star by Alvan Clark. Along with Procyon and Betelgeuse, this star makes up the
Winter Triangle. This star's companion was the second white dwarf to be discovered. Ancient Egyptians
associated the seasonal flooding of the Nile with this star. Name this brightest star in Canis Major and in the
night sky, sometimes called the "Dog Star."
ANSWER: Sirius A
Its companion, first sighted by Alvan Clark in 1862, was the first white dwarf ever discovered, and
the two rotate about each other with a period of about 50 years and a distance of about 20
astronomical units. Its more common name probably comes from the Greek for "sparkling",
although it was known as Sothis to the Egyptians, (*) who used it to calculate the length of the year and
for whom its appearance signaled the coming of the annual floods. Located 8.6 light years away from the
solar system, FTP, name this binary star, the brightest in the night sky and largest in the constellation Canis
Major, often known as the "dog star".
ANSWER: Sirius (prompt on Alpha Canis Majoris or the Dog Star early)
Friedrich Bessel discovered a wobble in this star, whose source was identified by Alvan Clark's
discovery of its B star. Edmund Halley's studies of this star led to his theory of proper motion. Along
with Betelgeuse and Procyon, this star forms the winter triangle, and it approximately lies along the
line formed by Orion's belt. With an apparent magnitude of minus 1.46, it is the brightest star in the
night sky. Located about 8.6 light years away, for 10 points, name this star found in Canis Major that is
sometimes called the Dog Star.
ANSWER: Sirius
In the early 20th century Hertzsprung proposed that this star was part of the Ursa Major moving group, but
recent analyses have put doubt on that claim. Along with Procyon and Betelgeuse it is part of the winter
triangle and it is also a part of the winter hexagon. Actually a binary system with a class A alpha star,
Friedrich Bessel discovered a companion star which he saw as 23 times as bright as the sun, now known to
be a white dwarf. For 10 points identify this star located in Canus Major, the brightest star in the night sky.
ANSWER: Sirius [prompt on Alpha Canus Majoris; prompt on dog star]
The Ancient Egyptians based their calendar on the heliacal rising of this body, which was known to
them as Sothis. The existence of this body's dimmer companion, discovered by Alvan Clark, was
predicted by Friedrich Bessel using observations of this body's "wobble"; that companion is a white
dwarf which forms a (*) binary star system with this star. This star forms the winter triangle along with
Betelgeuse [BEE - tle - juice] and Procyon [PRO - see - on], and it is also the alpha star of the constellation
Canis Major. For ten points, name this brightest star in the night sky, sometimes nicknamed the "Dog Star."
ANSWER: Sirius A (prompt on Alpha Canis Major or Dog Star before mention)
Ptolemy used it for the globe's central meridian. Rigel and Canopis both have far greater
luminosities, however, at a distance of 2.6 parsecs, this object is classified one of our near neighbours,
and is thus closer. It can be seen from anywhere below the 73rd Parallel, North. Despite its
appearance (*) from the naked eye, it actually consists of a white main sequence star that orbits a faint
white dwarf, making it a binary star system. It has its most notable quality because of its inherent
luminosity, twenty-five times that of the Sun, and its distance to Earth. Often called the Dog Star, for ten
points, name this star found in Canis Major, the brightest star visible in the night sky.
ANSWER: Sirius (prompt on "Dog Star" before mentioned)
It has been proposed to create a supercluster named for this star that would include the likes of Beta
Crateris, Beta Eridani, and Beta Serpentis. Its annual heliacal rising matches the earth's solar year because it
is found along the same arm of the Milky Way, and along with Procyon and Betelgeuse, it forms part of the
Winter Triangle. Friedrich Bessel first discovered its wobble, which was confirmed by Clark to be the result
of a companion to it that is now known to be a white dwarf, while its A star is a main sequence star of type
A1V. For 10 points, name this star system, the brightest in the night sky and a member of the constellation
Canis Major, often called the "Dog Star."
ANSWER: Sirius [prompt on "Dog Star"]
In 1844, Friedrich Bessel discovered that it is actually a binary system, and Walter
Sydney Adams later determined that the companion is a white dwarf, the first white dwarf
to be discovered. With Procyon ["Pro-see-yon"] and Betelgeuse, this star forms the Winter
Triangle. Several ancient cultures believed that the rising of this star marked the start of summer.
With a apparent magnitude of -1.46 ["minus one point four six"], it is the brightest star in the
night sky. This is for ten points what star also known as the dog star?
ANSWER: Sirius A (Accept Canicula or Aschere or Alpha Canis Majoris; accept the dog star before it is mentioned in the question)
This man dubbed himself the "Batavian Eratosthenes" in a 1617 book about taking measurements of the
Earth. That book by this scientist introduced the use of geodesic triangulation in surveying. Christian
(HOY-gens) Huygens's Dioptrica popularized this man's most notable discovery, which states that the ratio
of phase velocities determines the ratio of the sines of angles. For 10 points, name this Dutch scientist
whose namesake law gives the angle of light refracted through a boundary between substances.
ANSWER: Willebrord van Royen Snell [or Willebrod Snel van Royen; or Willebrordus Snellius]
This law was derived from Huygen's principle applied to points on a wavefront reaching a boundary
at different times. One rearrangement of this law can be used to find the critical angle, the angle
beyond which total internal reflection occurs, which is simply the arcsine of the quotient of the speed
of light in the two mediums. For 10 points, name this law of optics that gives the relationship between the
angles of incidence and refraction for a wave transitioning between two media with different indices of
refraction.
ANSWER: Snell's Law [or law of refraction; prompt on "Fermat's principle" or "principle of least time"]
One method of deriving this law uses the calculus of variations to find the path of least action between
two points, one in each region, or by finding the stationary point of the path length. This law thus follows
from Fermat's principle of least time. It can be derived by analyzing wavefronts using Huygens (HOI-gens)
principle. This law also gives the critical angle at which total internal reflection occurs. For 10 points, name
this law which relates the angles of incidence and refraction for a ray of light passing from one medium to
the other.
ANSWER: Snell's law
This law was originally discovered by Descartes under the name the Law of Sines. This law can be used
to express an equation for finding the polarizing or Brewster's angle. When one part of this law exceeds the
critical angle, the result is called total internal reflection. This law equates the angles of incidence for a
wave entering a new medium to the indices of refraction for those mediums. For 10 points, name this law
that can be used to explain the bending of light when it enters and exits glass and water from the air.
ANSWER: Snell's Law
One derivation of this equation involves setting the time derivative of a certain path length equal to zero and
relies on Fermat's principle of least time, and another common derivation of this relation compares the
wavelengths and speeds of light in a given medium and then applies Huygens- principle. This equation is
unreliable for anisotropic media and fails in cases of total internal reflection. Sometimes named after
Descartes, this law equates the products of the index of refraction and sine of the incident angle of two
materials through which light passes. For 10 points, name this law that describes refraction, named after a
Dutch physicist.
ANSWER: Snell's law
This physical result is usually derived by invoking a statement that can be observed in the constructive
interference of secondary waves. That observation is predicted by Huygens's principle and results in a
stationary trajectory. This law predicts a phenomenon used in fiber optics that occurs above the critical
angle, total internal reflection. Resulting from Fermat's principle of least time, for 10 points, identify this
law of optics, which holds that the ratio of the sines of two angles is equal to the ratio of the speed of light
in two media, usually applied to boundaries between two different indices of refraction.
ANSWER: Snell's law [or Descartes's law]
This law was originally discovered by the Arabic Ibn Shal, and it can be derived from Fermat's Least
Time Principle, since a ray of light will follow a path to a point that minimizes time, not distance,
causing a kinked path. The equation in this law cannot be satisfied above the "critical angle," leading
to (*) total internal reflection, and that equation states that the ratio of the sines of two angles is
proportional to the ratio of the two speeds of light. For ten points, identify this law named after its Dutch
formulator, which can find the angle of refraction as light passes through two different mediums.
ANSWER: Snellius's Law
This relationship explains the presence of inhomogeneous acoustic energy in the form of a "creep"
wave. One method of deriving this law involves boundary conditions of Maxwell's equations, and
Huygens proposed another explanation of it. It can be derived from Fermat's Principle of (*) Least
Time and Descartes used the law of sines to prove it independently. This law can be used to calculate the
angle at which light is reflected instead of passing through the medium. Relating the angle of incidence to
the refractive index, for ten points, name this law of optics which explains the refraction of light in two
different media.
ANSWER: Snell's Law (accept Descartes's Law before mentioned)
One method of deriving this law relies on Fermat's principle of least time. This law can be used to
find the critical angle at which total internal reflection occurs. One quantity used in this equation is
the ratio of the speed of light in the vacuum to the speed of light in the medium, and its stated as(*) n
1 sin theta 1 equals n 2 sin theta 2. For 10 points, name this law that gives the angle of incidence and
refraction for a beam of light passing from one medium to another.
ANSWER: Snell's Law
This equation can be combined with the Fresnel equations to derive Brewster's angle. Though this
law was originally discovered by Ibn Sahl and rediscovered by Thomas Harriot, its namesake derived
it in 1621, decades before Fermat proved it using his (*) principle of least time. It allows for the
calculation of the angle at which total internal reflection occurs, and states that sine of theta sub one over
the sine of theta sub two is equal to the ratio of the speed of light in two media. For 10 points, identify this
law named after its Dutch formulator, which calculates the angles of incidence given two indices of
refraction.
ANSWER: Snell(ius)'s Law
The first anaclastics were designed using a form of this idea by Ibn Sahl. Its naive form holds only in
specular media, though it holds more generally for the o-ray. One of its sometime-namesakes derived it
using spurious momentum conservation arguments, offending Fermat, who derived it rigorously from his
principle of least time. For 10 points, name this law the gives the refracted angle in terms of the incident
angle; a law usually named for its Dutch discoverer.
ANSWER: Descartes-Snellius law of refraction [accept Descartes- law; prompt on law of diffraction]
Its namesake window is a phenomenon by which an underwater viewer sees everything above the surface
through a cone of light measuring ninety-six degrees. It can be used to simplify problems involving the
Fresnel equations. Descartes discovered it independently of its namesake. Derived by Fermat's Principle, it
can be stated mathematically as n-sub-one over n-sub-two is equal to sine of theta-sub-two over sine of
theta-sub-one, and this law discovered by a Dutch astronomer in 1621 can describe why objects in a
fishbowl look larger in water. For 10 points, give the name of this law which gives the relationship between
the angles of incidence and refraction for a wave.
ANSWER: Snell's Law [accept Descartes- Law before Descartes is mentioned; prompt on law of refraction before "refraction"]
It is the reason chromatic aberrations result because the extent to which light bends when passing in and out
of another medium depends on the light's wavelength, a dependence that can be calculated by the Sellmeier
equation. A negative value for this property can lead to reverse Doppler effects and is often found in
metamaterials. It is equal to the square root of the product relative permittivity and relative permeability.
Defined as the ratio of the speed of light a medium to the speed of light in a vacuum, for 10 points, name
this physical property named for a Dutch mathematician.
ANSWER: Snell's law
This law is supported by the fact that far from a particular classical path, phase differences are negligible
because other paths see destructive interference, also known as Fermat's principle. One quantity in the
Fresnel equations must be derived from this law, which Descartes independently discovered as his law of
sines. By setting the refracted angle equal to 90 degrees in the associated equation and solving for the
incident angle, this law can calculate the conditions necessary to attain total internal reflection, which
occurs at the critical angle. For 10 points, identify this law of refraction, stating that n1 sine of theta 1
equals n2 sine of theta 2, as derived by its namesake Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: Snell's law [accept Fermat's principle, Descartes- law, or law of refraction before mentioned]
Richard Feynman's lectures give the example of a beautiful girl drowning to illustrate this equation,
which he shows can be derived from the principle of least time. This equation can be used to derive both
Brewster's angle and the critical angle. For 10 points, name this law that states that, at a boundary, the index
of refraction of the medium being exited times the sine of the angle of incidence equals the index of
refraction of the medium being entered times the sine of the angle of refraction.
ANSWER: Snellius's Law
Ptolemy discovered a principle similar to it, but it was only supported when he fudged the data to fit his
expectations. When involving monochromatic beams, it can also be expressed using wavelengths, instead of
the usual parameters. It generally only holds in isotropic media such as glass, with birefringence occurring
in anisotropic materials such as calcite. It follows from Fermat's principle of least time. Consequently, it can
also be explained by the Huygens principle. It relates the ratio of the velocities of a light beam is passing to
a specific constant. FTP, name this law in optics, which states that the ratio of sines of the angles of
incidence and refraction is equal to the opposite ratio of the indices of refraction.
ANSWER: Snell's law
One way to derive this is by applying the general boundary conditions of Maxwell's equations. Another way
to derive this law uses Fermat's principle of least time. In birefringent materials, the ordinary ray obeys this
law, while the extraordinary ray does not because this law only holds for isotropic media. This law states
that sine theta one over sine theta two is equal to v one over v two, where v is the local velocity of light.
FTP, name this law that describes the refraction of light at the boundary of two media.
ANSWER: Snell's law (accept also Descartes's law and the Snell-Descartes law; prompt on the law of refraction before mention)
The namesake of this law wrote the book Eratosthenes Batavus, which described a new method of
finding the radius of the Earth. This law was independently discovered by Rene Descartes, and can be
proven by Fermat's principle of least time. Valid for any kind of wave that is incident on a boundary that
is separating two media, it gives the relationship between the sine of the incident angle, and the sine of
the refracted angle. For 10 points, name this law of optics named for a Dutchman.
ANSWER: Snell's law of refraction
This relationship predicts the existence of creep waves, which are less useful than Rayleigh waves for
nondestructive testing. The boundary conditions of Maxwell's equations, along with Fermat's principle of
least time, may be used to derive it, and a quantity named for Brewster can be calculated from this law
assuming complete reflection. Involved in the derivation of the critical angle, this relationship predicts an
angle of fifty degrees will produce total internal reflection at a water-air boundary. For 10 points, identify
this relationship which determines how the angle at which light enters and exits a boundary changes due
change in refractive index.
ANSWER: Snell's law [accept Descartes's law; prompt on law of diffraction]
The most promising material for these devices is amorphous, is "hydrogenated" to passivate its high
density of dangling bonds, and is especially great when paired with an alloy of itself and either
germanium or a microcrystalline form. These devices are tested against the AM1.5 standard. The
ratio of the area of their I-V curve to the area formed by the intersection of their short-circuit
current
and open-circuit voltage is the fill factor. Polycrystalline (*) silicon dominates for these devices due to
the bulk of material required. Because they are operated in reverse bias, a current is created when electrons
are collected at p-side contacts and holes at n-side contacts due to the impact of a photon with energy
greater
than the bandgap. For 10 points, name these devices that convert sunlight into electrical energy.
ANSWER: thin-film solar cells [or PV cells; or photovoltaic cells; prompt on "p-n (junction)" or "solar panels"]
In January 2010, nine Rohini rockets were launched to study this event. Unusual rotation of the plane of
oscillation of pendulums during these events is called the Allais effect. Francis Baily is the namesake of
certain "beads" that morph into a "diamond ring" during these events, except in its annular variety. Arthur
Eddington used one of these events to confirm predictions of the General Theory of Relativity. This
phenomenon creates an umbra and penumbra upon Earth. For ten points, name this cosmic event in which
the moon blocks out the light from the namesake body.
ANSWER: solar eclipse (prompt on "eclipse")
An important model for these objects was proposed by Heyvaerts, Priest and Rust in the mid-70s, while
they were first observed by Richard Carrington in 1859. These entities are studied by the Max Millennium
Program, which partially analyzes the particle acceleration in them. Entities sometimes classified as the
more general type of them include Wolf 359 and UV Ceti. These events have been studied by the GOES
and Yohkoh missions, while gamma rays they produce were first imaged by the RHESSI Mission. Weak
ones are given the classification "B", while powerful ones have included an X5 that triggered the Bastille
Day event, a fifteen-minute-long geomagnetic storm. When the matter in these objects is heated above 10
million Kelvin, coronal mass ejections may occur. For 10 points, name these violent eruptions in the sun's
atmosphere.
ANSWER: solar flares [or stellar flares]
Spacecraft specifically investigating these phenomena include Hinode (HE-node-ay), Yohkoh, and
RHESSI (RESS-ee). Nitrates and beryllium-10 persist in Greenland from an 1859 example of these
phenomena called the Carrington event. They are classified as A, B, C, M, X, or Z depending on the
peak flux. These events are similar to (*) coronal mass ejections, and they can trigger geomagnetic
storms with the potential to knock out power. For 10 points, name these events in which a large amount of
energy enters the Earth's ionosphere, after being discharged from the Sun.
ANSWER: solar flares [or coronal mass ejections until it is read; or CME until "coronal mass ejections" is read; or geomagnetic storms until it is read; prompt on flares]
A two billion-dollar project to use this source of power is being built at Ivanpah in eastern California, and
the largest of several projects in Gujarat, India is at Charanka. A dish/Stirling system or parabolic trough is
often used to harness it. Increased efficiency comes from multi-junction parts, and this is harnessed by
crystal layers of doped semiconductors in an electric field under a cover plate. Several recent projects have
combined this power source with thermoelectric. Name this power source utilizing photovoltaic cells often
used by space stations because they are not impacted by cloud cover.
ANSWER: solar power [accept sun; prompt on light or photon]
The NASA IBEX is now mapping this phenomenon, and scientists believe that the craft observed a
reflection of this. Some scientists believe that Earth could not have had an atmosphere until its iron core
condensed because of this phenomenon. An unknown mechanism in the polar oval causes this phenomenon
to accelerate as it passes through Earth's magnetosphere, and it also forms a solar system-sized bubble in
the interstellar medium called the heliosphere. This phenomenon forces the tails of comets to always point
away from the Sun, while its periodic flares can cause geomagnetic storms that knock out power grids. Also
responsible for the Northern and Southern Lights, name this continuous stream of charged particles emitted
by the Sun's corona.
ANSWER: solar wind [prompt on solar flares before "flares"]
Hydrodynamic interactions due to this phenomenon create Parker spirals, which are a consequence of
rotations of the source of this phenomenon. A strong "radiation driven" phenomenon analogous to this is
observed in Wolf-Rayet stars and more generally beyond the Eddington limit in other systems. In conjuction
with Earth's magnetic field, this is responsible for 'fueling- the Van Allen Belts. The termination shock is
the point where this reaches subsonic speeds, and the heliopause is where it merges with interstellar
medium. This plasma flow is what causes comet tails to face away from the Sun. For 10 points, identify this
stream of charged particles released from the outer atmosphere of the Sun.
ANSWER: solar wind [or stellar wind]
The ACE and the UVCS instrument on the SOHO mission are designed to study this phenomenon. This
phenomenon twists a certain magnetic field into the Parker spiral. The boundary between this phenomenon
and the interstellar medium is called the bow shock. Its interaction with the Earth's magnetic field forms the
magnetosphere. It's the reason that comet tails always point away from the sun. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon, a stream of charged particles ejected from the atmosphere of the sun.
ANSWER: solar wind [or stellar wind]
The AMPTE experiment used lithium clouds to study the impact of this phenomenon. Biermann and
Ahnert both used the example of Whipple-Fedke to predict this phenomenon. IBEX has detected an
unusual "ribbon" involving this phenomenon thought to be interacting with the "Local Fluff". It uses
the Lorenz Force to help produce ring and Birkeland currents. Yokoh discovered that x-ray "holes"
were a major source of this phenomenon, which notably affects the structure of Parker Spirals. M-dot
and terminal velocity are two parameters derived to help measure this phenomenon, which dies out when it
reaches the heliosheath. The Mass Loss Rate for the closest example of this phenomenon is 10 to the
negative 14 per year. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon which interacts with the Earth's magnetic
field to create auroras, caused by the emittal of charged particles from the sun.
ANSWER: Solar Wind [Or Interstellar Wind]
The Rosetta mission will study the influence of this phenomenon on Wirtanen, and several boundaries
relevant to this phenomenon include the mystery boundary and the magnetic pile-up boundary. First
predicted by Ludwig Biermann, is velocity gradients give rise to corotating interaction regions, and its
magnetic fields are studied through the use of a spiral named for the man who first formulated a
comprehensive theory of it. Anomalous cosmic rays accelerate to high velocities at this phenomenon's
termination shock, and its balance with the interstellar medium defines the location of the heliopause.
Notably modeled by Eugene Parker, for ten points, identify this plasma of ionized particles and electrons
ejected from the Sun's corona.
ANSWER: Solar wind
This phenomenon can gather interstellar helium together in the so-called helium focusing
cone. This phenomenon interacts with a large magnetic field to produce the Parker spiral. The
effect of ICMEs can disrupt its formation, and when this phenomenon slows to below the
speed of sound, it produces the termination shock. This phenomenon interacts with the
magnetosphere to produce geomagnetic storms and auroras. For 10 points, name this stream
of charged particles emitted from the star closest to Earth.
ANSWER: the solar wind
A spiral associated with it is named for Eugene Parker who noted the similarity between Biermann and
Chapman's theories for this phenomenon. First observed by the Lunik II satellite, comprehensive
information about it was gathered by Mariner 2, which noted the direction of the flux of positive ions. The
discontinuity formed by its interaction with a planetary magnetic field is called the bow shock, and its
radiation pressure causes comets to have tails. For 10 points, identify this two word term which describes
the stream of particles ejected by the sun's corona.
ANSWER: solar wind
His namesake expansion simplifies the process of evaluating expressions similar to the Fermi integral and is
used to calculate the specific heat of an electron gas. The molar heat capacity of a metal can be expressed as
temperature times his namesake coefficient. He never won the Nobel Prize in Physics despite having been
nominated 81 times although six of his students, including Wolfgang Pauli and Werner Heisenberg, did. He
incorporated Fermi-Dirac statistics into the Drude model of electrons in metals which took Pauli's exclusion
principle into account. For 10 points, name this German theoretical physicist who introduced the fine
structure constant into quantum mechanics.
ANSWER: Arnold Johannes Wilhelm Sommerfeld
A transducer commonly used with this technology consists of stacks of piezoelectric ceramic
disks separated by electrodes and sandwiched between a stiff, light head mass and dense, heavy
tail mass. That transducer is the tonpilz, so-named for its mushroom-like shape. The multibeam
form of this technology produces a "swath" of data that is typically used to produce bathymetric
charts while its sidescan form is used in conjunction with a towfish. The passive type of this
technology does not have variables such as projector source level and reverberation level, which
are instead components of its active type. Concerns over its use include the mass stranding of
whales. For 10 points, identify this underwater acoustic technology.
ANSWER: SONAR [or sound navigation and ranging]
This phenomenon occurs above the Blake threshold. Structures that generate this phenomenon are
governed by the Rayleigh-Plesset equation. It is typically observed in implosions exceeding Mach 4
and is preceded by (*) cavitation. Its appearance is associated with the action of primary Bjerknes forces
on bubbles of smaller than resonance size and it is typically detected using a photomultiplier tube. For 10
points, name this phenomenon in which high frequency sound waves cause the implosion of gas bubbles in
liquids and trigger the emission of light.
ANSWER: sonoluminescence
In an apparatus with this word in its name, a mixture of neon and helium passes
through aluminum sheets separating modules with a scintillation counter and a
phototube on each end. Millikan employed hot-[this] spectroscopy to examine the
spectrum between ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths. Another device with this
word in its name consists of an electrode and a gasket and is in each cylinder of an
automobile, forcing the high voltage produced by the coil to arc. For 10 points,
name this term shared by a muon detector and a plug found in car ignitions.
ANSWER: spark [or hot spark spectroscopy]
The Lie group that most accurately describes isometries in this theory is the Poincare group. One
experiment in this theory shortened one arm on an interferometer and is named for Kennedy and Thorndike.
When the Schrodinger equation is corrected for this, it becomes the Klein-Gordon equation. The diagram
that uses hyperbolas and light cones to show this theory and the space in which this theory takes place are
both named for Minkowski. Events in this theory are four-vectors, and one quantity that appears in this
theory is represented with a gamma and called the Lorentz factor. Name this theory which explains
phenomena like time dilation and length contraction.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on "relativity," do not accept or prompt "general relativity"]
The Hafele-Keating experiment and its follow-ups supported this theory while spending less than $8,000,
and the Mossbauer rotor experiment shows an effect this theory implies at a higher precision than the Ives-
Stillwell experiment. It can be accounted for mathematically using the Lorentz Transformation, and can lead
to a paradox involving aging and space travel, the Twin Paradox. This theory reconciled Newton's Laws
and Maxwell's equations by stating that there is no absolute frame of reference and that the speed of light is
constant. For 10 points, name this theory developed by Einstein which shows the relationship between space
and time and which preceded general relativity.
ANSWER: special relativity [Prompt on "relativity." Do not accept "general relativity."]
The mathematical framework for this theory was laid when Henri Poincare proved that Lorentz
transformations are a subset of his namesake group, preserving the symmetries of the flat space-time
of the four-dimensional Minkowski space, not curved by any gravitational forces. It leads to the
famous equation that (*) E equals m c-squared, and it expanded Galileo's earlier work by including the
fact that the speed of light is the same in all reference frames. For ten points, identify this theory of Albert
Einstein, developed in 1905 along with a similarly-named "general" type.
ANSWER: special relativity (prompt on partial, do not accept "general relativity")
This theory was introduced in the paper "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies." Its namesake
principle states that physical laws are the same in any inertial reference frame. Consequences of this theory
include Lorentz contraction and time dilation, as well as mass-energy equivalence, which can be
formulated as E = mc2. For 10 points, name this theory developed by Einstein, which is not to be confused
with its more general form.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity]
Applying this theory to the Schrodinger equation gives the Klein-Gordon equation, and this theory
is set in a manifold called Minkowski space. The Rossi-Hall and Kennedy-Thorndike experiments
verified this result. In this theory, early evidence for which was the (*) Michelson-Morley experiment,
rigid bodies cannot exist, leading clocks lag, velocities always add to a quantity less than the speed of light,
and problems may be solved by considering the effects of time dilation or a length contraction named for
Lorentz. For 10 points, name this theory originated by Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity]
A quantity known as the rapidity can be used to simply computations in this theory, whose allowed
transformations compose the Poincare (PWAN-kuh-RAY) group. This theory, which is most easily
demonstrated in Minkowski (min-COW-skee) space, says that light travels at the same speed in all inertial
reference frames. It provides an explanation for time dilation and length contraction. For 10 points, identify
this theory of physics contrasted with it general form by Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: Special Relativity [do not accept "General Relativity"]
This theory utilizes a factor of one over the square root of one minus beta squared; that quantity
is known as the Lorentz factor. Applicable to only inertial reference frames, the twin paradox is a
consequence of its prediction of (*) time dilation. It also predicts the equivalence of mass and energy;
namely that E equals m c-squared. For 10 points, name this theory developed by Albert Einstein, which is
often contrasted with its more general form.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity; do not accept "general relativity"]
This theory was introduced in "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies." Objections to this theory
included the Kaufmann-Bucherer experiments, Paul Langevin's twin paradox, and the Ehrenfest paradox.
The pole-vaulter's paradox of this theory is explained by length contraction. For 10 points, identify this
theory of Albert Einstein which sets the speed of light as the maximum attainable speed.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity; do not accept "general relativity"]
One consequence of this theory was studied using mesons by Rossi and Hall, and this theory was
proposed in a work titled "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies." This theory indicates that the speed
of light is the same within all reference frames, and leads to time dilation and the equivalence of mass and
energy. For 10 points, identify this theory proposed by Albert Einstein, which is sometimes paired with a
"general" counterpart.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity; do not accept or prompt on "general relativity"]
In this theory, the dot product must be redefined in order to make it an invariant. In it, total energy and
momentum are unified into a 4-vector. Tests for this theory include particle lifetime experiments and space
isotropy measurements. Many effects that occur as a result of this theory involve a term equal to the inverse
square root of one minus beta squared. It explains length contraction, and time dilation using the
aforementioned Lorentz factor. It states that there is no absolutely stationary frame of reference, and an
equation relating energy and mass is derived from this theory. For 10 points, name this theory which states
that the speed of light is the same in all inertial reference frames, proposed by Albert Einstein before
general relativity.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity, but do NOT accept or prompt on "general relativity"]
This theory uses mathematical light cones as explanatory tools on Minkowski diagrams. The reciprocal
of the square root of one minus beta squared, where beta is a speed ratio, is the namesake "factor" in this
theory's Lorentz transformations. It predicts length contraction and time dilation as objects come near the
unattainable speed of light. For 10 points, name this theory which assumes that there is no privileged frame
of reference and was proposed by Einstein before its general variant.
ANSWER: Einstein's theory of special relativity [prompt on relativity]
Max Born extended the concept of a rigid body to this theory. Because timelike bivectors are not
closed under multiplication, a rotation is introduced when two operations in this theory are applied
in different directions. In the context of this theory, the velocity-addition formula is equivalent to the
law of addition for angles in the hyperbolic tangent function. A quantity important in this theory is
defined as the reciprocal of the square root of the quantity one minus beta squared. Consequences of
this theory include simultaneity not being absolute. This theory assumes the equivalence of inertial
reference frames and the constancy of the speed of light and it is the original source of the mass-energy
equivalence usually stated E equals m c squared. For 10 points, name this theory developed by Einstein,
who later created a "general" version.
ANSWER: Einstein's theory of special relativity [or SR; prompt on Einstein's theory of relativity; do not accept "general relativity"]
Poincare stresses ensure that electrons remain stable under this principle, and the Ehrenfest paradox
attempted to show that Born rigidity was not compatible with it. When combined with Maxwell's
Equations, this principle explains synchrotron light, while an important consequence of this concept created
the twin paradox. This concept led to the formulation of Minkowski spacetime, and Lorentz transformations
are used to calculate its effects of time dilation and length contraction. First described in the 1905 paper On
the electrodynamics of moving bodies, name this theory which states that the speed of light is constant in all
inertial frames of reference and that mass is a measure of energy, a key work of Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity, do not accept "general relativity"]
The mathematical manifold in which this occurs has isometries with the Poincare group, the
Minkowski space, and the transverse Doppler effect occurs in this paradigm. Its operations include
length contractions and transformations named for Lorentz. It extended [*] Galileo's principle
regarding laws of physics in all reference frames, and consistent with the results of the Michelson-Morley
experiment. Reconciling Maxwell's equations with the laws of mechanics at extremely high speeds, for 10
points, name this 1905 theory that suggested time dilation and energy-mass equivalence, a precursor to its
general variety conceived of by Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: special relativity [do not accept general relativity; prompt on "relativity"]
One experiment that tested this theory used detectors on Mount Washington in New Hampshire
to determine the change in the number of particles with a 1.5 microsecond half-life. In addition to
describing why muons reach the Earth's surface, this theory replaces Galilean transformations with
Lorentz transformations, which allows for (*) length contraction and mass dilation to occur. For 10
points, name this theory developed in 1905 that led to the formula E=mc2 from Albert Einstein.
ANSWER: special relativity [or special theory of relativity; prompt on relativity]
Thomas precession, which corrects the spin-orbit interaction in quantum mechanics, is a consequence of
this theory. This theory is based on the Minkowski space, and it gives rise to the composition law for
velocities. Hendrik Lorentz formulated his namesake length contraction based on this theory, and observers
moving at different speeds observe different time dilations, according to this theory. It is named because it
only applies to the case of inertial reference frames. Giving rise to mass-energy equivalence, for 10 points,
identify this theory which, among other things, states that nothing exceeds the speed of light.
ANSWER: special (theory of) relativity or SR or STR [prompt on partial answer]
One experiment that confirmed this theory saw no frequency shift in the Zeeman effect due to mass
anisotropy. Another experimental test of this theory measured the charge to mass ratio of an electron
and concluded that the two theories of Abraham along with Bucherer and Langevin were more likely
to be correct. In addition to the Hughes-Drever and Kaufmann experiments, another experiment
drastically decreased the size of one (*) arm in an apparatus in an attempt to detect a fringe shift. An
earlier experiment used a half-silvered mirror to split a ray of light and later recombined that light. The
Kennedy-Thorndike experiment modified the interferometer used by Michelson and Morley, whose results
helped influence this theory with the idea the speed of light is constant. For 10 points, name this theory
which uses Lorentz transformations, developed by Einstein.
ANSWER: special theory of relativity [prompt on partial answers; prompt on SR]
Part of this theory was upheld by the Frisch-Smith and Rossi-Hall experiments, which measured muon
lifetimes. Because it predicts that one type of transformation is non-commutative, the Thomas correction
must be added to a particle's precession. This theory allows for an additive alternative to speed called
rapidity. Considering a rigid rotating disc using only this theory leads to the Ehrenfest paradox.
Gravitational and inertial mass are the same according to its equivalence principle. This theory's "pole in
the barn" thought experiment can be explained with Lorentz transforms and length contraction. For 10
points, name this theory, developed by Albert Einstein before its "general" counterpart.
ANSWER: special relativity [or SR; prompt on "relativity"; do not accept "general relativity"]
Events in this paradigm are mathematically described by a manifold whose symmetry is the Poincare group,
called the Minkowski space; that space's "light cone" and "world line" constructs can be used to understand
questions of causality. This theory uses a factor symbolized gamma in Lorentz transforms; its consequences
include time dilation and length contraction. Postulating that there is no privileged inertial reference frame,
and that there is a constant speed of light, for 10 points, identify this theory of Albert Einstein's which is not
as applicable as its later, "general" counterpart.
ANSWER: theory of special relativity [prompt on "relativity"; do not prompt on or accept "general relativity"]
Measurements can be transformed in this theory using Lorentz transformations. This theory was
proposed in a 1905 paper, the same year in which its formulator proposed theories to explain capillary
action and Brownian motion. The underlying principle of this theory is that the speed of light is the same
for all reference frames, allowing one to derive that energy equals mass times the speed of light squared.
For 10 points, name this theory proposed by Einstein that is contrasted with a "general" counterpart.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity; do not accept "general relativity"]
This theory requires Poincare symmetry, which includes boosts, rotations, and translations. The Michelson-
Morley experiment confirmed one postulate of it by showing that the speed of light is constant in all
reference frames, and it is associated with the twin paradox. It incorporates a factor symbolized gamma that
is the square root of one minus beta squared and is only valid in inertial reference frames. Lorentz factors
are used for calculations in this theory that predicts time dilation and length contraction. For 10 points,
name this theory regarding objects traveling at near-light speeds proposed by Albert Einstein, which is
contrasted with its more general form.
ANSWER: Special Relativity [prompt on Relativity; do not accept "General Relativity"]
The Rossi-Hall and Kennedy-Thorndike experiments provided evidence of this theory. Born's idea of
rigidity in it was challenged by Ehrenfest's Paradox, and this theory uses Minkowski spaces.
Introduced in On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies, it assumes that all uniform motion is relative,
and that the speed of light is constant in a vacuum. Predicting Length Contraction and Time Dilation, for ten
points name this theory that links energy with mass, created by Einstein and contrasted with its general
counterpart.
ANSWER: Special Relativity
This theory was used to explain a rotation known as Thomas precession. This theory exists within
Minkowski space, and it gives rise to a phenomenon known as Lorentz contraction. First explained in the
third of the Annus Mirabilis papers, this theory gave rise to the twin paradox, which occurs due to time
dilation. Another consequence of this theory is the mass-energy equivalence, which is expressed as E=mc2
("E" equals "M" "C" squared). The speed of light is the same in all reference frames according to, for 10
points, what theory explained by Albert Einstein ten years before its "general" counterpart?
ANSWER: special relativity [also accept special theory of relativity; prompt on "relativity"; do not accept or prompt on "general relativity"]
In one problem in this theory, a rotating rigid disc demonstrates that Born rigidity cannot exist in a problem
called Ehrenfest's paradox. A Minkowski space is used to visualize problems in this theory, whose
principles are present in the twin paradox. A Lorentz transformation is used for conversions in this theory,
the consequences of which include time dilation and length contraction. For 10 points, identify this theory
proposed by Albert Einstein which states that the speed of light is constant in all reference frames, not to be
confused with his theory of general relativity.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity]
The Klein-Gordon equation is an extension of the Schrodinger equation incorporating this theory,
calculations of which are simplified in Minkowski space. One of its consequences is the pole vaulter's
paradox, where a running vaulter can fit a pole entirely within a barn smaller than the pole, and another
considers that a man moving in a space ship will age more slowly than his twin at rest. For 10 points,
identify this theory wherein one may change frames using Lorentz transformations to calculate length
contraction, which suggests that observations of motion depend on the frame in which they are measured as
proposed by Einstein.
ANSWER: special relativity [prompt on relativity; do not accept "general relativity"]
One consequence of this theory is that the hyperbolic tangent of the sums of rapidities is equivalent to the
sums of their hyperbolic tangents divided by one plus the product of their hyperbolic tangents. That
equation closely parallels one concerning composition of velocities as a consequence of this theory.
Transformation of coordinates in this theory is aided by Minkowski matrices which incorporate a factor
equivalent to one over the square root of one minus beta squared. That factor divides the proper length to
explain a phenomenon predicted in this theory and named for Lorentz and Fitzgerald. For 10 points, name
this theory developed by Einstein describing length contraction and time dilation associated with objects
traveling at near-light speeds.
ANSWER: special relativity
Using coordinates based on this theory, distance is calculated with an extra minus c times t
squared term. This theory states that observers in different reference frames at motion with respect
to each other have no way of knowing if events are simultaneous. Predictions of this theory include
the existence of (*) time dilation as well as the equivalence of mass and energy. For 10 points, name this
theory concerning space and time postulated by Albert Einstein that preceded a more general one.
ANSWER: special relativity [or SR; prompt on relativity; do not accept "general relativity"]
The width of these phenomena can be minimized with a tunable dye laser. Their displacement equals
magnetic quantum number times Bohr magneton times magnetic field in the Zeeman effect. Two of these
denoted D2 are also called the sodium doublet. Their wavelengths are proportional to the difference of
inverse squares of principal quantum numbers by the Rydberg formula, and they include hydrogen's visible
Balmer series and the sun's Fraunhofer lines. Caused by absorption and emission of photons, for 10 points,
name these bright or dark bands on a continuous spectrum.
ANSWER: spectral lines [accept emission lines or absorption lines before mention]
An experiment by Armand Fizeau and Leon Foucault attempted to measure this value. Cherenkov radiation
is produced when this value is exceeded. This quantity is the same in every inertial reference frame, which
was proven by the Michelson-Morley experiment. In an equation derived by Albert Einstein, energy energy
equals mass times this quantity squared. In a vacuum, this quantity is approximately 300 million meters per
second. For 10 points, name this fundamental constant denoted by the lowercase letter c, the fastest speed at
which an object can travel.
ANSWER: speed of light [accept c before mentioned]
Anicius Boethius was decapitated after documenting this quantity and Alhazen was the first to describe it as
finite in Arabic. Although even Kepler denied a finite value, around seventy years later eclipses of Io led the
Dane Ole Roemer to posit a value for this quantity. Following Newton's endorsement of Roemer's work,
James Bradley employed star aberrations for another approximation. FTP, name this measure, which
approaches 300,000 kilometers per second in a vacuum, notated by the constant c.
ANSWER: Speed of Light Prompt on c before mentioned
The Lorentz factor is defined as 1 over the square root of 1 minus v squared over this quantity squared,
so this quantity affects the extent of length contraction or time dilation. Tachyons are so named because of
their hypothetical ability to exceed it. According to Einstein's mass-energy equivalence, energy is equal to
mass times the square of this quantity. For 10 points, give this quantity symbolized c and equal to three
times ten to the eighth meters per second in a vacuum.
ANSWER: the speed of light [accept c early]
Electromagnetic radiation pressure is inversely proportional to this quantity. The Lorentz factor can be
found using an object's velocity and this quantity. Cherenkov radiation results when this value is exceeded,
and its value through a particular medium constitutes a material's refractive index. The special theory of
relativity states that this value is constant in all frames. Einstein proposed that energy is equal to mass times
this quantity squared. For 10 points, name this quantity that is equal to about three million meters per
second in a vacuum, often denoted c.
ANSWER: speed of light [prompt on c before mention]
If there is no charge present, this value equals the square root of the quantity time derivative of
electric field divided by curl of magnetic field. The reciprocal of this quantity gives the slope of the
sides of a cone in spacetime that defines which events can be impacted by a given event. This value is
in the denominator of beta, which is used to find the Lorentz factor. The second postulate of special
relativity states that this value is constant. The square of this value equals the ratio of energy to
mass. Name this value that is represented by a lowercase c and equal to about 3 times 10 to the 8th
meters per second in a vacuum.
ANSWER: speed of light [prompt on c]
The Fizeau experiment measured this quantity in moving water. Though it's not the age of the universe, this
quantity's finitude can resolve Olbers's paradox. It's equal to the reciprocal of the square root of the
product of permittivity and permeability of free space. Cerenkov radiation occurs when particles exceed the
local value of this in a transparent medium, emitting a largely ultraviolet bluish glow. The interferometer
used by Michelson and Morley failed to find any "ether" that would cause this quantity to vary. For 10
points, name this constant symbolized in E equals m c squared by c, which is the fastest possible speed.
ANSWER: speed of light [accept c]
In gravitational lensing, the square of this quantity is inversely proportional to the Einstein radius.
When expressed in cgs units, the fine structure constant is inversely proportional to this quantity and
h-bar. In a recent project called OPERA, scientists working with (*) neutrino oscillations at CERN
made claims challenging this quantity. Tachyons theoretically exceed this value, and Albert Michelson and
Galileo both worked with measuring it. For 10 points, identify this quantity whose square yields energy
when multiplied by mass, an upper bound on velocity roughly equal to 3 times ten to the power of 8 meters
per second.
ANSWER: speed of light [accept c before mentioned]
This quantity is raised to the third power in the definition of Planck length. In the Einstein field equations,
the product of 8 pi and the gravitational constant is divided by this quantity to the fourth power. An early
calculation of it was made by Ole Romer using the eclipses of Jupiter's moons. This quantity is found in the
Lorentz factor and is divided by velocity when calculating the index of refraction. In an equation developed
by Einstein, energy equals mass times this quantity squared. For 10 points, name this value that is
approximately three hundred million meters per second.
ANSWER: speed of light [prompt on "c"]
This quantity's square is in the denominator of the "B nu" formulation of the Rayleigh-Jeans law. In a
medium, this quantity is scaled by the square root of the product of the relative permeability and
permittivity. In Planck units, this electromagnetic quantity is normalized to one. This physical constant is
used to define the meter. This quantity is the only one of its type to be constant in all inertial reference
frames. The Michelson-Morley experiment demonstrated its constancy by showing that luminiferous ether
did not exist. If tachyons exist, they travel faster than this speed. For 10 points, what is the maximum speed
at which anything can travel, often denoted "c"?
ANSWER: the speed of light (in vacuum) [accept c until it is read]
The force per unit area of the Casimir effect is equal to this quantity times h-bar times pi-squared all
over 240 times distance to the fourth power, and an object's Schwarzchild radius is inversely
proportional to the square of this quantity. This quantity is equal to a certain quantity times the (*)
index of refraction of a material, and, according to relativity, it is invariant for all observers. Hypothetical
"tachyons" can exceed this value, and OPERA mistakenly claimed they had measured neutrinos going faster
than this speed. For ten points, identify this value often symbolized c and approximated as 3 times 10 to the
8th meters per second, the rate at which photons move in a vacuum.
ANSWER: speed of light (or c before mentioned)
This constant, which is equal to one over the square root of epsilon naught times mu naught, divides the
time-averaged intensity to yield the classical electromechanical radiation pressure. Hippolyte Fizeau used a
spinning mirror apparatus to approximate this value with a time-of-flight technique. Relativistic energy and
momentum tend to infinity approaching this value, which is equal to about 3.00 times ten-to-the-eighth
meters per second. For 10 points name this constant, the rate at which a photon moves through empty space.
ANSWER: speed of light in a vacuum [or c]
For a given spatial position and time, this quantity is the ratio between the magnitude of the electric field
and the magnetic field for a wave. Maxwell discovered that the square of this quantity equals the reciprocal
of the product of vacuum permittivity and permeability. The meter is defined using this value, which was
found to be constant in any direction in the Michelson-Morley experiment. Index of refraction is the
quotient of this value in a material and this value in a vacuum. The square of it is the proportionality
constant in Einstein's mass-energy equivalence. For 10 points, name this constant equal to about 3.0 times
ten to the eighth meters per second, symbolized c.
ANSWER: speed of light [or c before mentioned]
The Lorentz gamma contains the square of this constant in the denominator. This constant is equal to
one over the product of the square root of the permittivity and permeability of free space. The square of this
quantity serves as the proportionality constant between mass and energy, and special relativity posits it as a
universal speed limit. For 10 points, name this constant equal to approximately three times ten to the eight
meters per second, symbolized c.
ANSWER: speed of light [or c before mentioned]
This parameter is the only parameter in the Lorentz factor. Cerenkov ("CHAIR"-en-kov) radiation is
produced by objects exceeding this parameter. This parameter is equal to one over the square root of the
product of the permittivity of free space and permeability of free space. It is squared and multiplied by
mass in an equation for rest energy developed by Einstein. For 10 points, name this theoretical limit on the
speed of an object, which in a vacuum is equal to three times ten to the eighth meters per second.
ANSWER: speed of light [or c]
One attempt to measure this value used a toothed wheel and lantern relay between hills. That experiment
was performed by Fizeau, who modified Galileo's attempt to measure this quantity. Jean Foucault was the
first person to show that this value is less in water than in air. Using a coaxial cable, Kirchoff was the first
person to discover that electromagnetic signals can be sent at this quantity. Special Relativity states that, for
10 points, nothing can travel faster than what quantity?
ANSWER: speed of light [or c]
The power predicted by the Larmor formula is proportional to charge squared times acceleration
squared divided by the cube of this quantity. In cgs units, the fine structure constant is equal to the
electron charge squared divided by the product of h-bar and this quantity. This quantity is equal to
the ratio of the electric field to the magnetic field for a wave in free space. This quantity is equal to
one over the square root of the product of the (*) vacuum permeability and the vacuum permittivity. The
spatial invariance of this quantity disproves the existence of the luminiferous aether. The ratio of this
quantity in a vacuum to in a material gives that material's index of refraction. For 10 points, name this
quantity symbolized c and equal to roughly 186,000 miles per second.
ANSWER: speed of light [prompt on "c"]
The square of this physical constant is found in the equation for the Lorentz factor. The refractive
index is defined as the ratio of this quantity in a vacuum and in the material. The current definition
of the (*) meter is based off of this physical constant. Albert Einstein proposed that energy is proportional
to the square of this constant. For 10 points, name this physical constant typically denoted c that is roughly
equal to 300 million meters per second.
ANSWER: speed of light [or obvious equivalents; prompt on c before it is mentioned]
James Bradley corrected for parallax to measure this value using the star Draco in 1728. A failed
attempt to measure this value involved standings on hilltops about a mile apart, and was by Galileo. It was
first accurately measured using observations of Io, a moon of Jupiter, by Ole Roemer. The first time it was
measured purely on Earth was in 1849, when Armand Fizeau used a rotating wheel and a mirror eight
kilometers from the observer. For 10 points, identify this constant equal to about 300,000 kilometers per
second and denoted "c."
ANSWER: the speed of light [or the speed of light in air, or in a vacuum, or in any medium; or c before it is read]
Two times the inverse of this constant squared times GM is equal to the Schwarzchild radius. The
Lorentz (LORE-ens) factor is equal to one over the square root of one minus velocity squared over this
quantity squared. A material's refractive index is directly proportional to this quantity. The
Michelson-Morley (Michael-son-more-lee) experiment showed that this quantity was constant. The total
energy stored in an object is equal to its mass times this quantity squared. For 10 points, what quantity is
roughly equal to three times ten to the eight meters per second?
ANSWER: speed of light [or c]
Anisotropic (AN-iy-soh-troh-pick) materials in which this quantity changes along different directions are
birefringent (buy-ree-FRIN-gent). This quantity was measured in the Michelson-Morley experiment, which
showed that it is the same in all reference frames. According to special relativity, no object can exceed this
value, though scientists at CERN claimed to observe neutrinos doing so in 2011. For 10 points, identify this
speed denoted c, at which electromagnetic radiation such as visible and infrared rays travel.
ANSWER: the speed of light [or c before it is read]
The Planck length is equal to the square of the reduced Planck's constant times g divided by the cube
of this quantity. Vacuum permittivity is given as one over permeability times this quantity squared,
and this quantity also appears squared in the denominator of the Lorentz factor. Cherenkov
radiation occurs when a particle exceeds this quantity and accounts for the blue glow of nuclear reactors.
Time dilation occurs because this quantity is constant in all frames of reference. According to another
equation, this quantity is equal to the square root of energy divided by mass. For 10 points, name this
quantity equal to about three times ten to the eighth meters per second.
ANSWER: speed of light (accept reasonable equivalents, prompt on "c" before mentioned)
Squaring this value gives the reciprocal of the product of permeability and permittivity. Like the Boltzmann
constant, gravitational constant, and reduced Planck constant, this value is set equal to one when using
Planck units. Christiaan Huygens [HOY-genz] was the first person to successfully approximate this value,
using data collected by Giovanni Cassini and Ole Romer on eclipses of Jupiter. The Fizeau-Foucault [fihzoh foo-kohl] apparatus measured this more accurately using a rotating mirror. The fact that this value is in
fact constant was the second postulate of special relativity. Name this value that is squared to give the ratio
between energy and mass, equal to about 3 times ten to the 8th meters per second.
ANSWER: speed of light (in a medium) [prompt on c0 ["C naught" or "C (sub) zero"]; accept speed of light in a vacuum]
The square of electric charge is divided by the product of h-bar and this quantity in the definition
of the fine structure constant. This quantity is equal to the square root of the reciprocal of the
product of the permittivity and permeability of free space. The square of this constant is multiplied
by (*) mass in an equation developed by Einstein. For 10 points, identify this value symbolized c, equal to
about three times ten to the eighth meters per second.
ANSWER: speed of light [accept c before mentioned]
Froome determined a value for this quantity in 1958 using a microwave interferometer and Kerr cells to
correct for anomalies in the air. In Minkowski diagrams, it remains constant through the rotation of the
space plane. The beta term of the Lorentz factor is the ratio of velocity to this quantity, whose square is
equal to one over the product of the permittivity and permeability of free space. Producing Cherenkov
radiation when exceeded in a medium, this is, for 10 points, what quantity given by wavelength times
frequency for a photon, with value 3 times 10 to the eighth meters per second and often symbolized c.
ANSWER: speed of light in a vacuum [accept c until mentioned]
The time-averaged power radiated by a dipole is inversely proportional to the third power of this value.
One attempt to measure it used a rotating cog between a source and a detector, an apparatus named for
Fizeau. This value is equal to one over the square root of the product of the permittivity and permeability of
free space. This value is invariant in all inertial reference frames, according to special relativity. For 10
points, name this value equal to about three times ten to the eight meters per second.
ANSWER: speed of light [or c]
The energy of a photon can be described as the product of its momentum and this quantity. Cherenkov
radiation is produced when this value is exceeded, and this quantity divides velocity squared in the Lorentz
factor. The ratio of this value in a vacuum to this value in a particular medium is the refractive index, and it
is squared and multiplied by rest mass in an equation formulated by Einstein. For 10 points, name this
theoretical limit on the speed of objects, which in a vacuum is approximately equal to three times ten to the
eighth meters per second.
ANSWER: Speed of Light [accept c]
An object exceeding this quantity will experience amplified pressure perturbations explained by the PrandtlGlauert singularity that causes a visible vapor cloud to form. For a solid, this value is equal to the square
root of Young's modulus divided by the solid's density; for liquids, Young's modulus is replaced by the
bulk modulus. An object exceeding 25 times this value causes the surrounding gas to turn to plasma, and in
air, it is increased by about .6 meters per second for every temperature increase of one degree Centigrade.
An object traveling at this speed is said to be at Mach 1. For 10 points, name this value measuring about
340 meters per second in air.
ANSWER: speed of sound
In the ocean, a minimum for this quantity occurs in a layer known as the SOFAR channel. This value is
equal to the square root of the bulk modulus divided by the density. Dividing the velocity of an object by
this value gives the Mach number, and surpassing this value causes a sonic boom. For 10 points, name this
value which in air is approximately 340 meters per second, the velocity at which acoustic waves travel
through a medium.
ANSWER: speed of sound [accept obvious equivalents]
In air it is equal to the square root of the adiabatic index times the gas law constant times
temperature divided by molar mass, and Prandtl and Glauert suggested that approaching this
quantity would lead to infinite pressure. This quantity for a gas is not dependent on pressure or
density, but rather on temperature, which is why it is generally lower as one gets higher in the
atmosphere. This quantity is equal to about (*) 340 meters per second in room temperature air, and the
ratio of an object's speed to this quantity is its Mach number. For ten points, what is this quantity, the
measure of how fast a certain type of wave can reach our ears?
ANSWER: speed of sound (accept equivalents, accept Mach 1 before mentioned)
Planck's constant times this quantity divided by wavelength yields vibrational energy. The mixing of a fine
powder into a liquid reduces this quantity in the Hot Chocolate Effect. This quantity in fluids can be found
by taking the square root of the quantity bulk modulus over density. Extreme vibrations and a cone-shaped
cloud may form when objects surpass this quantity, also known as "Mach 1". Approximately 340 meters per
second at sea level, for ten points, name this quantity that is that measures the rate of motion of an acoustic
wave.
ANSWER: speed of sound (accept equivalents, accept "Mach 1" before mention)
Using a Lucite or Kundt tube, this quantity can be determined experimentally by examining the
sequence of Lissajous curves as the measuring apparatus is moved. The Prandtl-Glauert
transformation breaks down at this value as it predicts an object at it would experience infinite
pressure. It's often derived as the square root of the adiabatic constant times gas constant times
Kelvin temperature over molecular weight, which is why it is commonly approximated for the
atmosphere as (*) 331.45 plus 0.61 times Celsius temperature. Often determined in physics labs with a
resonance tube or tuning fork, the shock waves formed when this quantity is exceeded give rise to a sonic
boom. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to Mach 1, the speed at which acoustic waves travel in a
given medium.
ANSWER: speed of sound
The square of this quantity is equal to the derivative of pressure with respect to volume. This quantity
equals the square root of the bulk modulus over density. In air, it increases roughly 0.6 units for each
degree Celsius increase in temperature. If a fluid is irreversibly flowing at a velocity less than this number,
then the fluid will speed up. Exceeding it produces a shock wave. The ratio of velocity to this quantity is
the Mach number. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to about 343 meters per second in air, the speed
at which acoustic waves can travel.
ANSWER: speed of sound [or velocity of sound waves; prompt on c]
In SI units and under standard conditions for air, this is equal to 20.05 times the square root of the
temperature, but usually an approximation using a reference plus 0.6 times the temperature is used. This is
equal to the square root of the ratio of bulk modulus to density. When this is exceeded a shock wave is
created. At sea level this about 761 miles per hour. The ratio of an objects velocity to this is called the
Mach number. For 10 points, name this quantity which is the rate at which an acoustic wave travels.
ANSWER: speed of sound [or velocity of sound]
In the Debye model, Planck's constant times this quantity divided by wavelength gives the vibrational
energy of phonons in a crystal. At it, one may observe a Prandtl-Glauert Singularity, or "shock egg"
from a white cylindrical cone of water droplets due to a decrease in [*] air pressure. The ThrustSSC
and Bell XS-1 achieved it, on land and air respectively. For 10 points, name this point at which an object
travels with a Mach number greater than one, and moves from transonic to supersonic speed.
ANSWER: speed of sound [accept sound barrier; accept c-sub-s; prompt "Mach 1" before mentioned]
For an ideal gas, this quantity equals the square root of the adiabatic index times the gas constant times
temperature over molar mass, a result which can be derived from a more general formula equating it to the
square root of the bulk modulus over the density. For air, this quantity varies based on humidity and
temperature. An object (*) exceeding this quantity will cause the formation of a cone of condensation due to
the formation of a shock wave, which is also accompanied by a loud boom. For 10 points, identify this
speed equal to Mach one, the rate at which phenomena such as thunder and voices propagate through a
medium.
ANSWER: speed of sound (accept Mach one before mentioned)
At constant entropy, the square of this quantity equals the partial derivative of pressure with
respect to density. Kundt's tube was used to determine this quantity, which is given by the square
root of the bulk modulus over density. This quantity decreases with (*) altitude, so it is more difficult
for high-flying aircraft to break the Mach barrier. For 10 points, identify this quantity which equals
approximately six hundred thirty miles per hour at sea level, the dividing line between subsonic and
supersonic.
ANSWER: speed of sound [or the speed of a mechanical wave in some medium]
In a system of small volume, this quantity can be calculated using Kundt's tube, and one person to
attempt to calculate this quantity was William Derham. The Newton-Laplace equation states that this
quantity equals the square root of bulk modulus over density, and another formula states that, in air, it can
be calculated as 0.606 times the temperature plus 331.3. It is equal to about 768 miles per hour, or 343
meters per second. For 10 points, identify this quantity which is equal to Mach 1.
ANSWER: speed of sound [accept early buzz of Mach 1]
Pierre Gassendi determined that this value is frequency-independent, and G.L. Bianconi showed that
it increases with temperature. When this value is exceeded, strong local shock waves develop, and
pressure waves are unable to outdistance their source. Aerodynamic drag sharply increases when
approaching this value, surpassed by Chuck Yeager. The ratio of fluid velocity to this value in the fluid is
known as the Mach number. For 10 points, name this value that represents the rate at which a certain
type of compression wave travels through a material.
ANSWER: speed of sound [prompt on early Mach 1]
This property can be calculated for a medium using an equation that takes a square root of the
medium's ratio of specific heats, gas constant, and absolute temperature. When an object reaches this
value for a medium, that object can experience choked flow and create a vapor cone. One equation
involving this value places it in the denominator under the (*) velocity of an object, with the outcome of
that equation being named for an Austrian physicist. For 10 points, name this property that is about 340
meters per second at sea level and is equivalent to a velocity of Mach 1.
ANSWER: speed of sound [or Mach 1 before it is read; prompt on Mach before it is read; do not accept or prompt on "Mach number"]
Scientists at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider are studying how this quantity is manifested in protons
because it cannot be accounted for by quarks and gluons. According to the Standard Model, the only
particles with a zero value for this quantity are Higgs bosons, and a graviton has the unusual value of two
for this quantity. Particles with integer values of this quantity do not need to obey the Pauli exclusion
principle and are classified as bosons. For electrons, it is described by fourth quantum number, and groups
of particles are considered polarized when this value is in a consistent direction. Name this measure of a
particle's intrinsic angular momentum.
ANSWER: particle magnetic spin [or spin projection quantum number; prompt on angular momentum or rotational momentum before the end; do not prompt on "momentum"]
In more than two dimensions, this quantity's namesake group is a universal cover of SO(n). The
wavefunction is multiplied by -1 raised to twice this quantity under exchange of identical particles.
The first sign of the existence of this property was the (*) splitting of beams of atoms directed through a
non-uniform magnetic field. Because the wavefunction of electrons is antisymmetric under exchange, two
electrons in the same orbital must take opposite values for this property by the Pauli exclusion principle. All
fermions have a half-integer value of this property, and all bosons have an integer value. For 10 points,
name this property considered an intrinsic form of angular momentum.
ANSWER: spin
This quantity is represented by the SU(2) group of three anticommuting, Hermitian, unitary matrices named
after Wolfgang Pauli. The quantization of this quantity was established by an experiment that passed silver
atoms through an inhomogeneous magnetic field conducted by Stern and Gerlach. This quantity is the
fourth quantum number after the principal, azimuthal, and magnetic numbers. Fermions are characterized by
half-integer values for this quantity. For 10 points, identify this quantity that represents intrinsic quantum
angular momentum of a particle.
ANSWER: spin
When constructing molecular orbitals, the letters alpha and beta symbolize the eigenfunctions of this
quantity. In the singlet state, the net value of this quantity equals zero. Metals with low splitting energy
prefer to maximize this quantity according to Hund's rule of maximum multiplicity. This quantity explains
why two lines appeared when silver atoms were passed through an inhomogeneous magnetic field in the
Stern-Gerlach experiment, as it "couples" with orbital angular momentum. This quantity is opposite in sign
for two electrons in an orbital according to the Pauli exclusion principle, and has a magnitude of 1/2. For 10
points, name this intrinsic angular momentum of a particle.
ANSWER: spin
The Hamiltonian in the Heisenberg model of ferromagnetism is a sum of the product of a coupling constant
and operators of this property. For one type of particle, the operator for this property can be found by
multiplying h bar over two by the Pauli matrix. A g-factor of approximately two is used in the expression
for an electron's magnetic moment resulting from this property. This property must differ for two electrons
in the same orbital. Evidence for it came from the Stern-Gerlach Experiment. An electron can have plus or
minus one half as values of this property's quantum number. For 10 points, name this intrinsic angular
momentum of a particle.
ANSWER: spin [accept spin angular momentum]
One type of material named for this property can be modeled by the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model.
An experiment which investigated this property was repeated using hydrogen atoms in their ground
state. That Phipps-Taylor result confirmed the hypothesis of Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck concerning
the presence of this property, which was demonstrated by the (*) Stern-Gerlach experiment. According
to the Pauli exclusion principle, electrons within the same orbital must have opposite values for this
quantity. For 10 points, identify this property which is the intrinsic angular momentum of a particle, a
property you might associate with the motion of a top.
ANSWER: spin angular momentum [prompt on angular momentum]
The magnetic moment of a charged particle is equal to this quantity times the g-factor times charge
divided by two times the mass. Delta baryons have a value of 1.5 for this quantity, and, like other
particles with half-integer values of this quantity, obey Fermi-Dirac statistics, whereas those with
integer values obey (*) Bose-Einstein statistics. The Pauli Exclusion Principle states that pairs of electrons
in the same orbital sub-shell must have opposite values of this quantity. For ten points, identify this quantum
number, the angular momentum of a sub-atomic particle.
ANSWER: spin (prompt on angular momentum)
A collection of objects with this property on a lattice makes up the Ising model, which models
ferromagnetism. Applying a correction based on Thomas precession gives the correct gyromagnetic ratio
that relates this quantity to the magnetic dipole moment. The operators representing this property are
multiples of the Pauli matrices. The coupling of this intrinsic property to another, similar property gives rise
to fine structure in atoms. It is conventionally measured in units of h-bar, and in that system, fermions have
half-integer values of it. For 10 points, name this intrinsic property of subatomic particles which is
distinguished from orbital angular momentum.
ANSWER: spin angular momentum [prompt on "angular momentum"; do not prompt on or accept "momentum"; do not accept "orbital angular momentum"]
This quantity's namesake waves are low-level excitations in continuously symmetric magnetic
lattices, and magnons are the quantizations of those waves. A theorem partly named for this quantity
states that the wavefunction of a system is either symmetric or antisymmetric under particle
interchange, depending on the particles- value for this quantity. Though (*) Pauli initially rejected this
concept, his namesake matrices are used in its mathematical formulation, and it doubles the number of
possible states according to the Pauli exclusion principle. This quantity, which is denoted by the quantum
number "m sub s," has a magnitude of one-half for protons, electrons, and many other fermions. For 10
points, name this form of intrinsic angular momentum.
ANSWER: spin [prompt on "angular momentum" before mention]
In magnetic physics, this term is used to describe a magnet with frustrated interactions in which
ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic states are distributed randomly. In addition to describing that kind of
"glass," this word names a number that can be found for an arbitrary direction z by multiplying m-sub's by
the reduced Planck constant. This word also names a property whose interaction with orbital effects gives
rise to fine structure splitting. This word names a quantized property of particles that was first discovered in
the Stern-Gerlach experiment. For 10 points, identify this word that names the intrinsic angular momentum
of particles, such as half-integer values for fermions.
ANSWER: spin [prompt on glass before mentioned; do not accept "angular momentum"]
The product of this quantity and the gyromagnetic ratio gives the magnetic dipole moment. This quantity's
operators are obtained by multiplying h-bar over two times the Pauli matrix. Silver atoms were sent through
an inhomogeneous magnetic field to confirm its existence in the Stern-Gerlach experiment. Particles with
half-integer values for this quantity, or fermions, cannot simultaneously occupy the same quantum state, but
bosons can because they have integer values for it, according to the Pauli Exclusion Principle. For 10
points, name this intrinsic angular momentum of a particle.
ANSWER: spin
The rate at which the net value of this quantity exponentially decays to zero can be measured using a
Hahn echo and is characterized by the T2 relaxation time. This quantity changes during intersystem
crossing. According to the selection rules for electronic transitions, the net change in this quantity for
an electronic transition MUST be zero. The difference between fluorescence and phosphorescence is
that this quantity changes in phosphorescence as a (*) triplet state is converted to a singlet state. Only
isotopes with a nonzero total value of this quantity can be used in NMR. An electronic configuration
possessing the highest value for this quantity has the lowest energy according to Hund's first rule. For 10
points, name this quantity which for electrons is the fourth quantum number and takes on values of plus or
minus one half.
ANSWER: spin [prompt on "multiplicity," accept "spin multiplicity," prompt on "magnetization" before "intersystem crossing"]
When this property is nonzero, an applied magnetic field creates an even number of sublevels in
the anomalous Zeeman effect. The precession of this quantity's vector generates signals in NMR
spectroscopy, in which coupling between particles with this property causes splitting. It was first
discovered in an experiment in which a furnace launched a beam of sliver atoms through an
inhomogenous magnetic field, performed by (*) Stern and Gerlach. It is represented by up or down
arrows in configuration diagrams, and each subshell of an orbital can contain only two electrons due to the
fact that this property for an electron is either 1/2 or negative 1/2. For 10 points, name this property, the
quantum number representing the intrinsic angular momentum of a particle.
ANSWER: spin angular momentum [or intrinsic angular momentum before mention; prompt on "angular momentum" or "momentum" before mention]
Gouldsmit and Uhlenbeck explained the mathematical theory of this property, which was proposed to
account for the doublet spectrum of alkali metals in the Zeeman effect. This property is described by
symmetric matrices named for Pauli, and splitting of a beam of silver atoms in the presence of a magnetic
field confirmed the quantization of it in the Stern-Gerlach experiment. Also known as intrinsic angular
momentum, for 10 points, identify this fourth quantum number, which comes in multiples of one-half and is
caused by the rotation of particles about their axes.
ANSWER: spin
The long relaxation times observed in forbidden transitions from a triplet degeneracy for this quantity to a
singlet state results in phosphorescence. For an electron, the gyromagnetic ratio relates this quantity to
magnetic dipole moment, and operators for this observable can be expressed using Pauli matrices. The two
beams of silver atoms observed in the Stern-Gerlach experiment correspond to opposite values of this
quantity, and electrons in the same orbital must have opposite signs for this quantity according to the Pauli
exclusion principle. For 10 points, identify this quantity simply defined as the intrinsic angular momentum
of a particle, which can be plus or minus one-half for an electron.
ANSWER: spin [accept spin quantum number until "observable"; accept phosphorescence until "this quantity"]
Along with orbitons and holons, quasiparticles carrying this property are formed from electrons in Luttinger
liquids, which carry density waves in charge and this property. Similar wave-like disturbances in the
collective structure of this property for a crystal lattice are quantized into magnons. This property separates
orthohydrogen from parahydrogen, and its total value is 0 for singlet states and 1 for triplet states. This
property causes a beam of silver atoms sent through an inhomogeneous magnetic field to split into two
beams instead of forming a continuous band. This property, described by a set of Hermitian unitary matrices
named for Wolfgang Pauli, was discovered in the Stern-Gerlach experiment. For 10 points, name this
intrinsic form of angular momentum, whose quantum number can be plus or minus one-half for electrons.
ANSWER: spin angular momentum [prompt on "angular momentum" before mention]
Clifford algebras over Euclidean spaces are used to define the namesake objects of this property, which
Lorentz transform according to relations involving commutators of gamma matrices. Self-field interactions
cause the proportionality between this value and its associated magnetic moment to differ from 2, a fact that
implies QED must be used to calculate the electron gyromagnetic ratio. One form of the operators for this
observable is given by the Pauli matrices and it was Pauli who first proposed this property. Theorized by
Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck, FTP name this property that differentiates fermions and bosons, a form of
intrinsic angular momentum, usually plus or minus one half for an electron.
ANSWER: spin; accept spinors
In crystal field theory, weak field ligands produce the high type of this property and intersystem crossing
from a doublet state to a triplet state in phosphorescence occurs due to a change in this property. It confers
an intrinsic dipole moment to the nucleus, resulting in hyperfine structure and the interaction between an
external magnetic field. The magnetic dipole moment it produces is the cause of the Zeeman effect.
Particles can be described by either Bose-Einstein statistics or Fermi-Dirac statistics depending upon the
value of this property. For 10 points, what is this property that represents a particle's angular momentum
and according to the Pauli exclusion principle cannot be the same for electrons in the same orbital.
ANSWER: spin
This property was discovered by Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit in alkali metals. Graviton has a value of 2 for
this property, and the Higgs boson has a value of 0 for it. This property causes ferromagnetism when its
moment for all atoms line up in the material. Electrons with the same value for it are forbidden to share an
orbital due to the Pauli Exclusion Principle. An integer for bosons and half-integer for fermions, for 10
points, identify this property, the intrinsic angular momentum of a subatomic particle that is either one-half
or negative one-half for the electron.
ANSWER: spin [do not accept spin angular momentum or spin quantum number]
The Sivers mechanism is used to model one type of asymmetry of this property, and this property gives its
name to a type of disordered material modeled by the Sherrington-Kirpatrick model. The relaxation and
transport of it is the basis for Giant Magnetoresistance sandwich structures used in hard disks, and the three
canonical operators for this quantity are obtained by multiplying h-bar over 2 times the Pauli matrices.
Heisenberg proposed these kinds of chains as a model for magnetism, and the experiment that led to its
discovery as a quantum phenomenon used a furnace to fire silver atoms through an inhomogeneous
magnetic field with the results consistent with only two possible values of this property. For 10 points,
identify this quantity investigated by the Stern-Gerlach experiment which has integer values for bosons and
half-integer values for fermions.
ANSWER: spin [prompt on angular momentum]
One aspect of this property was confirmed in an experiment that fired silver atoms through an
inhomogeneous magnetic field. That experiment, performed by Stern and Gerlach, showed that this
property was quantized. Fine structure refers to splitting spectral lines due to coupling between it
and an electron's orbital angular momentum. Pauli names a set of matrices associated with it, and was
the first to propose it as a quantum number. For 10 points, name this property that is an integer for bosons
and half integer for fermions, a particle's intrinsic angular momentum.
ANSWER: spin
Different values of this quantity determine whether one can use Bose-Einstein or Fermi-Dirac
statistics. One component of this quantity was found to have two opposite values when a beam of hot
silver atoms was passed through a non-uniform magnetic field in an experiment performed by Stern
and Gerlach. Electrons occupying the same quantum state must have (*) opposite values of it
according to the Pauli exclusion principle. For 10 points, identify this quantity defined as the intrinsic
angular momentum of a quantum mechanical system and which is an odd multiple of one-half for fermions
such as electrons.
ANSWER: spin angular momentum
In the XY model, above the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition temperature, the universal jump occurs
when this type of stiffness goes to zero. Elements of the representations of the group of this name
transform into their negative with a 360 degree rotation. Thomas precession adds a factor of 1/2 to
the interaction energy between this quantity and orbital (*) angular momentum. In the Ising model,
magnetization equals the magnetic moment times the sum over all sites of this quantity, which if aligned
leads to ferromagnetism. Two electrons can occupy the same orbital given opposite values of this quantity.
Bosons have integer values of this quantity while fermions have half integer values of quantity. For 10
points, give this quantum number.
ANSWER: spin [accept spin angular momentum]
The interaction represented by "[this quantity] dot L" gives rise to the "2 J plus 1" degeneracy. Potts and
Ising modeled ferromagnetism using a lattice of variables representing this quantity. It produces a magnetic
dipole moment that gives rise to the Zeeman effect. An experiment in which silver atoms were fired through
a magnetic field, performed by Stern and Gerlach, showed that this quantity is quantized. Its value is the
fourth quantum number, which equals plus or minus one-half for an electron. For 10 points, name this
quantity, the intrinsic angular momentum of a subatomic particle.
ANSWER: spin angular momentum [prompt on "angular momentum" before it is mentioned; prompt on "S"]
The X-ray photoelectron spectrum of palladium has two peaks due to this effect. This effect was
documented in a Jahn-Teller lattice by Kugel and Khomskii, and increasing the strength of this
phenomenon allows intersystem crossing. Two-dimensional semiconductors with high values of this
interaction give rise to the quantum spin Hall effect. The Lande interval rule states that if this
interaction is weak, the components of this interaction have split energy levels. Its interaction energy
is equal to the sum of the energy of Thomas precession and the Larmor energy, and this effect creates a
2J+1 degeneracy. It can be considered an internal version of the Zeeman effect, and can be divided into JJ
and Russell-Saunders coupling depending on the size of the atom involved. For 10 points, name this
interaction, a coupling between the magnetic field of a nucleus and the spin of an electron circling it.
ANSWER: Spin-orbit coupling or spin-orbit interaction
Magnetohydrodynamic effects on the sun's magnetic field create this type of structure named for
Parker. Horizontal wind sets the surface layer into motion, causing one of these structures to form in
the ocean, in a form of them named for Ekman. A diagram of the parametric point of the Fresnel
functions takes the form of this structure; that diagram is named for Cornu. The Tully-Fisher relation
is the relationship between the stellar mass and intrinsic luminosity of galaxies that take this shape. For 10
points, name these structures, exemplified by galaxies like Andromeda that aren-t elliptical but can be
barred.
ANSWER: spirals
Like capacitors, when these objects are placed in parallel, their effective namesake constant becomes
equal to the addition of the two individual values of those constants. The angular frequency of a weight
connected to one of these objects is given by taking the square root of that constant over the mass. That
constant for these objects also shows up in a law that relates the displacement of an object to the restoring
force. For 10 points, Hooke's Law problems are often given in the context of a mass on one of what elastic
objects?
ANSWER: springs [prompt on simple harmonic oscillators]
The maximum force of one of these devices is inversely proportional to the quantity one minus the Poisson
ratio. They-re not capacitors, but the constants for individual ones in parallel are added in order to find the
total value of that constant for the system. These devices- namesake constants are expressed in units of
Newtons per meter. The potential energy of these devices is found using the equation one-half times k times
x squared, which is the integral of F equals k x. For 10 points, name these simple harmonic oscillators that
are governed by Hooke's law.
ANSWER: springs [prompt on SHOs or simple harmonic oscillators before mentioned]
"Negator" varieties of these devices exert constant force over their entire range of motion. They are
attached to magnets in seismometers. The cantilevers of atomic force microscopes are approximated
as these devices. To determine the density of the earth, Cavendish employed a torsional example of
these devices, which can be used in hanging balances. Like that of capacitors, the namesake constant
of these devices adds linearly in parallel. That constant has units of Newtons per meter and is multiplied by
the negative of displacement to find the restoring force exerted on these devices in a law that relates stress
and strain. For 10 points, name these sources of elastic energy whose stretching is described by Hooke's
law.
ANSWER: coiled springs [prompt on simple harmonic oscillators]
These objects are slowed by viscous drag in a dashpot. They are described by a second-order
differential equation with characteristic frequency equal to the square root of k over m. A mass hanging
from one of them will be displaced by a distance of m g over k. The restoring force on these objects is
proportional to the displacement in their total length according to Hooke's law, making them harmonic
oscillators. For 10 points, name these metal coils that store energy by being stretched or compressed.
ANSWER: springs [prompt on simple harmonic oscillators until it is read]
In the fine structure constant, the charge of an electron is raised to this power. By the divergence theorem,
any law in one over this many degrees can be written in Gaussian form. Kepler's Third Law establishes a
proportional relationship between the cube of the semimajor axis of an orbit and this power of its period.
The force between two electric charges and the intensity of light emanating from a source both vary
inversely with this power of the distance. In the formula for the area of a circle this power is assigned to the
radius. For 10 points, give this name for when a term is raised to a power of two.
ANSWER: square [accept 2 or second power before "two"]
A control system has this property if the number of poles of the closed-loop system in the right half
plane is zero according to Nyquist's criterion. The neighborhood around a supercritical Hopf
bifurcation produce limit cycles with this property, and limit cycles with this property have a
negative first Lyapunov coefficient. A linearized dynamical system only has this property if the
eigenvalues of the matrix have negative real parts. A collection of point charges cannot have a
stationary equilibrium with this property according to Earnshaw's theorem. In the shell model, a
nucleus has this property if all of its shells are filled, and nuclei that are doubly magic have an especially
strong version of this property. Due to deformation of large nuclei, Seaborg predicted the existence of an
"island" of nuclei with this property, which would not undergo radioactive decay. For 10 points, name this
property of some systems which allows them to resist small perturbations.
ANSWER: Stability (accept word forms)
The motion of these objects was studied using a Poincare map by Henon and Heiles. Different types
of these objects are frequently modeled as polytropes of various indices, and thus satisfy the LaneEmden equation. The Saha equation is used in the classification of these objects. These objects are
divided into population (*) one, two, and three types based on their ages. When the Jeans criterion is
satisfied, gravitational collapse leads to their formation. "Oh, be a fine girl, kiss me" is a common
mnemonic for their spectral classification. The CNO cycle and the proton-proton chain reaction occur in
them, and they are on the main sequence while fusing hydrogen. For 10 points, name these gravitationallybound balls of plasma undergoing fusion.
ANSWER: stars
These objects are commonly studied using a log T-log rho graph, from which one can easily find if
gas pressure or radiation pressure is more important. The opacity of these objects is proportional to
density times temperature to the negative seven-halves according to Kramers's law. A condition for
the formation of these things is the Jeans length being exceeded by a molecular cloud, which will (*)
collapse and tend to form "clusters" of them. These objects are classified according to their spectral lines in
the Harvard classification scheme, which divides them - in order of decreasing temperature - into the
categories O, B, A, F, G, K or M. For 10 points, name these astronomical objects whose life cycles are
depicted on H-R diagrams, and which include red giants and brown dwarfs.
ANSWER: stars [prompt on black bodies; or red giants, neutron stars, or any more specific type of star]
These bodies form through a process that begins with ambipolar diffusion, which leads to cloud collapse.
During the formation of these bodies, they go through the Hayashi and sometimes the Henyey track. The
Pillars of Creation are a region in which many of these bodies form. These bodies can be grouped by
population depending on their metallicity. Their life cycles follow the Main Sequence of the
Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. For 10 points, name these bodies that include Alpha Centauri and the sun.
ANSWER: stars
The UBV system can be used to classify these objects. These objects undergo proper motion.
Assemblages of them can fall into the categories of open or globular clusters. They are plotted on a
Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. Variable (*) ones, like Cepheids, can be used as standard candles. Helium
was first detected in one of these objects. They are often formed in nebulas. For 10 points, identify these
celestial objects that emit light and include the Sun.
ANSWER: stars
All of the properties of these objects depend upon mass and chemical composition, according to the
Vogt-Russell theorem. Some examples of these objects are classified as T Tauri, which lose some
of their luminosity while on the Hayashi track. The CNO cycle takes place inside these objects,
producing alpha particles. The relationship between the absolute magnitude and spectral class of
these objects is shown on the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. These objects can be classified as giants
or dwarfs, and the explosion of one of these objects can be a supernova. Name these objects, examples
of which include Canopus, Sirius, and our Sun.
ANSWER: stars
The mass distribution of objects newly created by this process follows a power law with exponent negative
2.35 according to the Salpeter function, which is a form of initial mass function. Small remnants of this
process are known as Herbig-Haro objects, and regions in which this process occurs a lot include Rho
Ophiuchi. Bok globules are opaque regions in which this process occurs, and this process requires a
molecular cloud to expand beyond the Jeans length, then collapse. Usually resulting in the creation of a
protoplanetary disk, this process sometimes results in an object which contracts until it reaches the Hayashi
limit, then proceed to the main sequence. For 10 points, name this process occurring in stellar nurseries.
ANSWER: Star formation
In 2004, Alex Zettl used boron-nitride nanotubes to observe a "giant" variety of this effect, and the AutlerTownes effect is an AC version of it. A low-energy tail in the absorption edge of semiconductor spectra
known as the Franz-Keldysh effect is related to one type of this effect; that type results in an increase in
interband separation and a decrease in exciton binding energy, and is known as the quantum-confined
variety. According to Kramers' theorem, this effect can only break degeneracy completely for a system in
which the sum of the particle spins has an integral value. The linear version of this effect can only exists for
degenerate states that are not parity eigenstates, while for non-degenerate states, only the quadratic variety
exists. Analogous to the Zeeman effect, for ten points, identify this quantum-mechanical effect in which
spectral lines are split by an applied electric field.
ANSWER: Stark effect
A "giant" version of this occurs in cones and nanotubes of boron nitride, and this effect of a rotating dipole
on its surroundings can be described by Mathieu functions. The same effect in the presence of a strong laser
is the Autler-Townes effect, and a related effect occurs in uniform media rather than potential wells and is
called the Franz-Keldysh effect. It is useful in rotational spectroscopy, where low-J transitions rely on this
effect, but most famously, its linear form is related to degeneracy between the 2s and 2p orbitals in a
Coulomb potential. For 10 points, identify this relative of the Zeeman effect, the splitting of spectral lines
by an applied electric field.
ANSWER: Stark effect
Stars with a low value for this quantity produce jets that ionize gas, creating Herbig-Haro objects. For
globular clusters, this quantity can be found with the delta b minus v method. The logs of mass and this
quantity are plotted against metallicity in namesake relations. Protoplanetary disks surround stars with low
values for mass and this quantity. Temperature and this quantity are generally the highest in Type Ia
supernovae progenitors. Dark stellar remnants that have finished evolving have high values for it. On a HR
diagram, stars with roughly equal values for it are on a stellar isochrone. For 10 points, name this quantity
of stars, which for the Sun is about 4.6 billion years.
ANSWER: stellar age [or equivalents like "how old a star is"]
Massive O and B stars may produce bubbles named after this phenomenon, filling huge cavities in the
interstellar medium. Radiation pressure on condensing dust may cause this phenomenon in stars near the
end of their lives. Wolf-Rayet stars have very strong ones of these, which causes them to lose relatively
large amounts of their mass. The one produced by and named for the Sun is responsible for creating the
overall shape of the Earth's magnetosphere and the auroras. Identify this phenomenon in which is a stream
of particles released from the atmosphere of a star.
ANSWER: stellar wind [anti-prompt on "solar wind"]
The de Jager model for this phenomenon overpredicts it in OB-type stars. That "weak" problem with this
phenomenon cannot be explained by its namesake clumping or by the broadening of P Cygni profiles, which
is indicative of line-driving processes causing this phenomenon. Some luminous blue variables, like Eta
Carinae, exhibit bubbles named after this phenomenon. Other stars that exhibit this phenomenon lose their
nitrogen lines as it occurs, resulting in a transition from WN to WC classification; those are Wolf-Rayet
stars. Near us, it manifests as Parker spirals and its interaction with the magnetosphere allows aurorae to be
visible on the Earth's surface. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which charged particles are ejected
from a star's surface.
ANSWER: stellar wind [or solar wind]
A scientist studying this phenomenon analogized a component of it as a de Laval Nozzle, and
extended a hydrostatic model of Eugene Chapman. Measuring this phenomenon via the ACE satellite
is used to predict the Dst index and the AL. Gamma Velorum and other (*) Wolf-Rayet stars exhibit
this phenomenon very strongly, and this phenomenon is twisted into a ballerina skirt shape by the influence
of magnetic fields. The existence of this phenomenon, which drops below the speed of sound at the
termination shock, is the reason why comet tails always point away from the sun. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a stream of charged particles are ejected from the atmosphere of a star.
ANSWER: stellar wind [or solar wind]
The idea for this first occurred to both of its formulators after reading of Louis Dunoyer's work on sodium.
One component in this experiment had to be aligned to less than 0.1 nanometer precision, leading to
numerous failures, while other failures resulted from not having a proper way to detect the results. The
latter problem was remedied thanks to cigar smoke in the air serendipitously caused a deposit of sulfur to
form on the detector. In its final form the circular slit was replaced by a rectangular one, leading to results
that confirmed Bohr's atomic model, though it could not explain the anomalous Zeeman Effect until the
work of Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck. An effusion was heated to 1,000 degrees Celsius to produce the
outgoing particles, and I. I. Rabi would work further on this experiment. FTP, identify this experiment
where the deflection into two discrete, quantized angles caused by silver atoms passing through a magnetic
fieldled its two German namesakes to hypothesize the theory of electron spin.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
Phipps and Taylor modified this experiment five years after it was first performed and found that using
hydrogen yields a similar result. It was initially seen as a test between the Bohr-Sommerfeld and classical
theories of the atom, and part of the original setup was later modified by I. I. Rabi, replacing the T-field
with a radio-frequency oscillating magnetic field. This experiment passed a beam of silver atoms between
two magnets, and the beam split into two. For 10 points, name this experiment that confirmed the
quantization of electron spin.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
Phipps and Taylor replicated this experiment in 1927 using hydrogen atoms in a ground state. One
namesake was an assistant to Max Born, while the other worked for Frankfurt's Institute for
Experimental Physics. Isidor (*) Rabi used this experiment's set-up to discover his namesake oscillation,
while Ramsey and Kleppner used its principles for an energy source for the MASER. Corroborating the
Bohr-Sommerfeld claim that angular momentum is quantized, this February 1922 experiment passed silver
atoms through a non-homogeneous magnetic field. For 10 points, name this German advance in quantum
mechanics, presaging the discovery of spin through varying atomic movement.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach Experiment
The machine used in this experiment can be represented as a projection operator into orthogonal subspaces.
Usually modeled using electrons, the original experiment actually used silver atoms, and later ones verified
it with hydrogen atoms. Though one of the simplest quantum systems, with only two states, it was
nonetheless critical to the development of quantum mechanics, demonstrating the nature of measurement as
a process that fundamentally altered the system. FTP, name this 1922 experiment devised by a pair of
German physicists in which particles were deflected through an inhomogeneous magnetic field,
demonstrated that they have intrinsic spin.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
Hermanspahn's performing of this action on electrons in carbon-12 five plus ions in a Penning-trap used
microwaves to excite the electrons at their Larmor frequency. Another non-destructive version of this
procedure was carried out by Dehmelt to observe the electron g-2 factor. This setup is difficult to achieve
with some charged particles because the Lorentz force on the particles is greater is than the effect to be
observed causing a blurring of trajectories. The results of this setup show an even number of lines such as
the two observed in the first running of this experiment. In this experiment, an inhomogeneous magnetic
field was created and a collimated beam of silver atoms was sent through the field. For 10 points, name this
experiment that showed that electrons have spatially quantized angular momentum.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
In this experiment, sulfur from cigar smoke in the laboratory helped in easy visualization of the spots on the
detectors. A variation of this experiment used sodium atoms and a time varying radio-frequency B field,
resulting in oscillations named for its performer, I. I. Rabi. In its original setup, a beam of silver atoms split
into two distinct beams when it was fired through an inhomogenous magnetic field. For 10 points, name this
experiment which confirmed the quantization of intrinsic angular momentum, or spin.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
Karpa and Weitz carried out a version of this experiment on polaritons, quasiparticles that model
slow light. This experiment is mimicked by population inversion in a MASER. Employing an
extension of this experiment's apparatus led I. I. Rabi to discover his eponymous oscillation. The results
of this experiment accorded with the later hypothesis of Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit. This experiment featured
a nonuniform magnetic field that deflected a beam of silver atoms, giving two beams rather than a
continuous distribution. Created to test the Bohr-Sommerfield hypothesis, for 10 points, name this doublyeponymous experiment that demonstrated the discrete value of spin.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
This experiment served as the basis for Jackson and Broadway's study of "active nitrogen" species. This
experiment also served as the basis for an experiment whose result was explained by the assumed effective
magnetic moment of dark state polaritons and was carried out by Karpa and Weitz. An extension of this
experiment was used by Gordon, Zeiger and Townes to create the first MASER. That extension of this
experiment led to the discovery of Rabi oscillations and was a precursor to NMR spectroscopy. This
experiment's setup involved firing a beam of silver through an inhomogeneous magnetic field. For 10
points, identify this experiment conducted by two German scientists, which demonstrated that electrons
have quantized spin.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment [or Otto Stern-Walther Gerlach experiment]
Karpa and Weitz used a version of this experiment to show that dark polaritons in an
electromagnetically-induced transparent medium have non-zero magnetic moment. Another version of this
experiment was used to show that state transitions could be induced by time-varying RF fields, an effect
used in MRI machines. Phipps and Taylor showed that its results could be extended to hydrogen atoms, and
the particles undergoing this experiment had principal quantum number 1 and angular momentum quantum
number 1. A sulfur-containing cigar was used to visualize the two spots on the detector in this experiment,
which fired a beam of silver atoms through an inhomogenous magnetic field. For ten points, name this
experiment which showed that electrons have spin, conducted by two German scientists.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
D-Amico created a mesoscopic version of the apparatus used in this experiment by applying two non-
dispersive phases to an interferometer. One version of this experiment sought to demonstrate that
dark polaritons in an transparent rubidium gas cell had a non-zero magnetic moment. An extension
of its apparatus led to the discovery that state transitions could be induced with RF fields by (*) I. I.
Rabi, whose namesake oscillation is useful in MRI equipment. Ramsey achieved population inversion in a
maser using a method similar to this experiment. This experiment featured a beam of silver atoms that were
deflected by an inhomogeneous magnetic field. For 10 points, name this experiment that demonstrated the
existence of spin.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
Five years after it was first performed, Phipps and Taylor re-ran this experiment using hydrogen and got the
same result. A modification of the device used in this experiment was used to show that state transitions in
magnetic momentum could be induced using time-varying fields; that change is an oscillation named for I.I.
Rabi and is used in MRIs. The purpose of this experiment was to test competing theories proposed by
Larmor and Sommerfeld. Conducted by two of Niels Bohr's associates, this experiment showed that a beam
of silver atoms shot through a magnetic field splits as a result of the intrinsic angular moment of the atoms.
This is, for 10 points, what doubly-eponymous experiment which proved that atoms and electrons have
quantized spin?
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
Kleppner and Ramsey used a similar apparatus as this experiment to achieve population inversion in
MASERS, and similar results were determined for ground-state hydrogen by Phipps and Taylor five
years after this experiment. The phenomenon observed was due to torque effects causing precession
in (*) dipoles which produced two spots on a photographic plate, rather than the classically predicted
spread. The apparatus in this experiment consisted of a furnace of boiling silver, from which atoms were
directed through a magnetic field before the silver beam split in two. FTP, identify this experiment
conducted by and named for two Germans, in which the quantization of electron spin was confirmed.
ANSWER: Stern-Gerlach experiment
For Raman scattering, this person names the lines caused by the positive and negative wavelength
shifts. A law named for this scientist states that the drag force on a particle in a fluid is proportional
to six pi times the velocity. He is the second namesake of a set of very difficult to solve partial (*)
differential equations that describe fluid flow, which he names with Navier (NAH-vee-ey). For 10 points,
name this British physicist who generalized Green's theorem to relate surface integrals and volume
integrals.
ANSWER: George Gabriel Stokes
With respect to the Raman Effect, the shift named for this man is the difference in wavelength between his
"lines" or the "anti-lines" and that of the radiation responsible, as in fluorescence, a term he coined. In
vector analysis, the theorem named for him was a generalization of both Gauss- and Green's Theorem, and
was formulated originally by Kelvin. In the cgs system, he names the unit for the quantity described in an
equation of fluid dynamics that can be simplified to the Euler equation and is named for this man and a
French physicist. FTP, name this physicist and mathematician, who worked on viscosity with Navier.
ANSWER: George Gabriel Stokes
He give his name to the radius of a sphere which diffuses at the same rate as a given molecule, and his
namesake law gives the frictional force on a spherical objects with small Reynolds numbers. A threedimensional flow with axisymmetry can be modeled with his (*) stream function and this man gives his
name to the difference between the average Lagrangian flow velocity and the average Eulerian flow
velocity, which describes his namesake drift. A set of four parameters relating polarization and intensity is
named for him, and a theorem relating the surface integral of the curl to the line integral of a vector field
over its boundary is named for him and Kelvin. FTP, name this British physicist, the second namesake of a
set of nonlinear partial differential equations describing the flow of a viscous incompressible fluid along
with Navier.
ANSWER: George Gabriel Stokes
This quantity's tensor and its trace are multiplied by the two Lame parameters in a 3D
generalization of a certain law. An axis on which this quantity is plotted is the starting point of a line
offset by 0.2% from the origin that is used to find the offset yield point. The ratio of two types of this
quantity is negative in materials that tend to form domed-shapes when put into flexure, instead of a
saddle-shape. That value is the ratio of the (*) transverse to longitudinal forms of this quantity, which is
Poisson's ratio. The axial form of this quantity is the change in length per unit length. For 10 points, what
quantity divides stress in Young's modulus?
ANSWER: strain
Objects sometimes known as this type of nuggets have non-negligible Coloumb forces because electrons
orbit them. This adjective is also occasionally affixed to an extremely dense type of star created after a
collapse of a neutron star, more commonly referred to as a quark star. The property of this name, proposed
by Kazuhiko and Gell-Mann, is similar to isospin symmetry in that it is not conserved outside of the strong
nuclear force. A particle with this name composes the three parts of an omega-minus baryon, and also made
up part of the lambda particle discovered in 1947. For 10 points, identify this adjective which describes the
quark paired with charm.
ANSWER: strange [accept word forms like strangeness]
In 2001, the KEK PS E373 created of particles that consist of a doublet of this property in the
NIAGRA event. Farhi and Jaffe created a model of stable matter with this property. The horizontal
lines on a baryon decuplet diagram show particles with equal amounts of this property, which was
postulated when a certain particle had a measured lifetime 13 orders of magnitude greater than its
predicted lifetime. The lambda and omega baryons have this property, and first-order weak interactions
usually change this property by 1. Adding this property to the baryon number, multiplying the quantity by
one-half, and adding the isospin gives the hypercharge according to the original Gell-Mann-Nishijima
formula. K-mesons contain this particle along with either an up or down quark or antiquark. For 10 points,
name this second-generation quark flavor discovered along with charm.
ANSWER: Strangeness (accept strange quark)
One particle composed of three of these entities can decay into a neutral pion and a xi minus baryon.
This particle is a defining feature of the hyperons. This particle defines a certain quantity which was first
discovered during a 1947 cosmic collision in which the lifetime was 13 orders of magnitude larger than
expected, an observation caused by lambda baryons. That property is preserved in strong and
electromagnetic interactions but not weak interactions. Omega minus baryons have three of these particles,
which are also found in a particle which saw the first observed CP violation called the kaon. For 10 points,
name this second generation quark typically paired with the charm quark.
ANSWER: strange quark [prompt on quark before mentioned]
Cauchy names a tensor of this quantity. The shear form of this quantity is directly proportional
to viscosity for Newtonian fluids. The highest this quantity can be without permanently deforming a
material is the (*) elastic limit. Often represented with sigma, this quantity is the numerator in the
definition of Young's modulus. For 10 points, identify this quantity that, according to Hooke's law, is
directly proportional to strain.
ANSWER: stress
The strength of the electric field times this quantity over a constant equals the surface charge on a
material exhibiting piezoelectricity. The maximum value of this quantity that a material can take before
fracturing is known as its ultimate strength. The shear form of this quantity is equal to the shear rate times a
viscosity constant. Young's Modulus equals the ratio of this quantity to strain, which is commonly graphed
against this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity that represents the internal forces exerted on
particles by their neighbors.
ANSWER: stress
In cardiology, the value of this parameter increases with radius and decreases with wall thickness
according to Laplace's Law. Knowing three vectors for this quantity in mutually perpendicular
planes at a point allows for it to be calculated for any plane through that point according to Cauchy's
theorem. Cauchy also lends his name to the second-order tensor used to represent this quantity,
which has the normal ones on the diagonal and the shear ones off the diagonal. This value can be
represented by Lame's ellipsoid but more commonly the normal and shear components are plotted against
each other to find Mohr's circles. When this value passes the yield point, deformation occurs, and the ratio
of it to strain is given by Young's modulus. Like pressure, it is represented as force per unit area. For 10
points, name this measure of the intensity of forces acting on a deformable, solid body.
ANSWER: stress (accept tension due to ambiguities)
Nanson's formula can be used to relate the nominal form of this quantity to its "true" form; the former form
is one of two named for Piola and Kirchhoff. Yielding starts when one form of this reaches the yield
strength, that form is named for Richard von Mises. Einstein's field equations use a version of it to describe
spacetime curvature, combined with energy in a namesake tensor, and it can be graphically represented by a
circle named for Mohr. Hooke's law holds that it is proportional to strain in elastic materials. For 10 points,
what is this quantity, the average amount of force on a surface inside a body per unit area, that is divided by
strain in Young's modulus?
ANSWER: mechanical stress [accept "nominal stress" before nomimal is mentioned, accept "Piola-Kirchhoff stress" before they are mentioned]
A tensor which contains terms for this quantity, energy, and momentum is related to the Ricci tensor and the
metric tensor by the Einstein field equations. For a fluid, the only term describing its response to this
quantity is the bulk modulus, which describes the compressional form of this quantity. The shear form of
this quantity is related by an expression involving Poisson's ratio and Young's modulus to the shear
deformation. Plastic deformation begins when this quantity exceeds an object's yield point. For 10 points,
name this quantity, a measure of the force per unit area that deforms a body, which is related in simple
materials to strain by Hooke's law.
ANSWER: stress [accept compressional stress; accept shear stress; prompt on "strength"; prompt on "pressure"]
Walter Cannon and Hans Selye established the earliest scientific basis for its study. The "viscous" type of
this occurs in fluids, while the photoelasticity is a method used to determine the distribution of this. A
tensor named after this and energy is the source of the gravitational field in the Einstein field equations and
determines the way spacetime curve, and another tensor for this is named for Cauchy. In linguistics, this
term refers to the relative emphasis given to different syllables of a word, while in mechanics it refers to the
energy particles of a material exert on each other. Name this term, which, in psychology, means a feeling of
pressure or strain.
ANSWER: stress
One form of this quantity can be calculated using a Mohr circle. Applying too much of it can cause an
object to exceed its yield point. It is found in the numerator of Young's modulus. The definition of Le
Chatelier's principle states that a system counteracts the effects of an applied one of these. Like pressure,
this quantity is measured in pascals and equals the applied force over an area, resulting in a strain. For 10
points, name this term describing a physical or emotional tension.
ANSWER: stress
One axiom used to define this says that the action on any part of a body is equal to the system of
forces on the surface of the body. That axiom can be used to derive the result that two vectors for this
acting on opposite sides of a surface have the opposite sign. In addition to the Euler-Cauchy postulate
and Cauchy's lemma, this quantity at any point can be represented in the Piola-Kirchoff tensor,
which avoids the problem of calculating the area of the body in the deformed configuration that is
present in the Cauchy tensor. The (*) yield point gives the value of this quantity past which a material
will deform non-reversibly. A two dimensional method of visualizing this quantity plots its normal and
shear components in Mohr's circle. The Young's modulus is defined as this quantity over strain. For 10
points, name this quantity using units of pressure that measures internal forces for a deformable solid.
ANSWER: stress [do not prompt on "strain" or "pressure"]
The ratio of this value caused by grain collisions to that caused by a surrounding viscous fluid is
the Bagnold number. Fields of this quantity are created by adding a dislocation to a crystal. This
quantity's second deviatoric invariant is the subject of von Mises- criterion. Conservation of angular
momentum dictates that the tensor form of this quantity is symmetric, and the terms of that matrix
are restricted by Mohr's circles. Bingham plastics begin flowing after a cutoff value of this quantity.
The off-diagonal elements of the (*) Cauchy tensor for this quantity are called shear. This quantity is
plotted against strain in order to find Young's modulus. For 10 points, name this quantity, a force on a
continuous material that causes deformation.
ANSWER: stress
The Montonen-Olive duality corresponds to an N=4 Yang-Mills theory for the symmetry of Maxwell's
equations for these by replacing the gauge coupling constant with its reciprocal. The Nambu-Goto action
and the Polyakov action lead to equations of motion for them, the latter used for quantization. Different
theories of them involve group symmetries such as E8 by E8 or SO(32), and some allow open versions
corresponding to the photon, or closed versions corresponding to the graviton. It was first introduced to
correct for a 1919 theory that applied an extra dimension to unify electromagnetism and gravity, a theory
named after Kaluza and Klein. Early theories introduced the tachyon, while more modern theories have
eliminated that particle and call for a total of 10 spatial dimensions. Often mathematically referred to as 1branes, FTP identify these fundamental one-dimensional structures that are theorized to compose all matter.
ANSWER: strings
Veneziano considered these objects to explain the similarity of t-channel and s-channel scattering in
strongly interacting mesons. Like the Einstein-Hilbert action, the relativistic action of these objects
has a square root of negative the determinant of the metric, but it is only integrated over tau and
omega; that is the Nambu-Goto action. One conjecture discovered by Maldacena states that there is
a relationship between objects in n-dimensional space with conformal symmetry and these objects
living in n-plus-one-dimensional (*) anti-de Sitter space. The path these objects trace as they move in
spacetime is called their worldsheet, and open ones must have ends connected to D-branes. For 10 points,
name these really really tiny objects that make all particles with different modes of their vibrations.
ANSWER: strings (prompt on "tachyon"; accept open string tachyons on the first clue)
An analogue of the holographic principle in this theory is the AdS/CFT correspondence, or
Maldacena duality. A unification of previously proposed theories of this type along with
supersymmetry is the eleven-dimensional M theory, whose basic objects are (*) two-dimensional
membranes. Prominent critics of this theory include Lee Smolin, who has written on its unfalsifiability. For
10 points, name this theory of modern particle physics, an attempt to unify quantum mechanics with general
relativity by modeling particles as the vibrations of namesake one-dimensional structures.
ANSWER: string theory
The landscape described by this formalism consists of roughly "ten to the five-hundred" metastable vacua.
The spacetime geometry described by it incorporates worldsheets bound to D-branes, as well as
compactified spaces. Criticism of it often focuses on the large number of free parameters in the theory,
making it practically untestable; however, this formalism also provides a basis for the anthropic principle. In
the mid-90s, Ed Witten revolutionized this field when he united all types of them into M-theory, which
describes an 11-dimensional universe. For 10 points, name this theory of everything in which all matter is
composed of namesake tiny loops of energy.
ANSWER: superstring theory
The main formalism for incorporating electric charge in this theory treats it as arising from an
interaction with the Kalb-Ramond Field. A unified form of it with gravity is conjectured to be
equivalent to quantum field theory via the Maldacena correspondence. The concept of T-Duality was
proposed to explain how different physical configurations in this theory can result in the same
macroscopic behavior. Edward (*) Witten delivered a lecture that suggested its five major branches
could be unified into M theory. At the heart of this theory are branes with a dimension parameter of 1 which
have been used to predict the entropy of a black hole when subjected to an immense tensile force. For 10
points, name this unifying theory that models physical particles as a one-dimensional object.
ANSWER: superstring theory
Considering this model in an anti-de Sitter space leads to its equivalence to certain field theories in the
AdS/CFT correspondence. In this model, the Nambu-Goto action governs the movement of objects, which
move along surfaces known as D-branes. Many versions of this model are unified in an eleven-dimensional
extension of it known as M-theory. One of the primary goals of this theory is to explain quantum gravity by
unifying quantum physics with general relativity, producing a "theory of everything." For 10 points, name
this theory which attempts to explain all physics via the vibration of its namesake one-dimensional objects.
ANSWER: string theory
Two of these types of theories include one based on SO(32) and another based on E 8 cross E 8,
which both state that left-moving and right-moving excitations don-t communicate. Those are
described as heterotic. The objects central to these theories can be described by the Nambu-Goto or
Polyakov actions, and these theories are said to be dual to conformal field theories in the AdS-CFT
correspondence. These theories, which include the IA, IB, IIA, and IIB theories and predict that Calabi-Yau
manifolds are the form of the extra dimensions of spacetime, are a leading candidate for the theory of
everything. For 10 points, name these theories, which state that subatomic particles are actually different
vibrations of namesake one-dimensional objects.
ANSWER: String Theories
The theory of this interaction has a property that may be explained by a fluid composed of
instantons. One phase of matter predicted by a model of this force cannot be studied by perturbation
theory, necessitating the use of lattice gauge theory. One form of this interaction is mediated by
virtual pi and rho mesons and is modeled by the (*) Yukawa potential. The gauge theory describing this
force is based on the group SU(3) and is known as QCD. This force acts on particles with color charge and
is mediated by gluons. For 10 points, identify this force whose name suggests its ability to function over
much vaster distances than the weak force.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force [or strong interaction; prompt on nuclear force; prompt on Quantu Chromodynamics before mention; prompt on color force before mention]
One theory explaining this force relies on the concepts of confinement and asymptotic freedom. That
theory of this force is called quantum chromodynamics. The massless particles that mediate this force can
carry eight different types of color charge and are called gluons. This force is responsible for binding
protons and neutrons together to form atomic nuclei. For 10 points, name this fundamental force which, as
its name implies, is the most powerful of the four.
ANSWER: strong force [or strong nuclear force]
The operation of this interaction was predicted by Hideki Yukawa to involve pions. The SU(3) [S-U-3]
gauge theory that models this interaction predicts that it diminishes at short distances and that it
decreases as distance increases; those properties are asymptotic freedom and confinement. Modeled
by quantum chromodynamics, this force acts on fermions that have color-charge. It is mediated by
gluons. For 10 points, name this fundamental force that binds an atom's nucleus together.
ANSWER: strong force [accept strong interaction; accept color force or interaction before it is read]
One property governing this phenomenon reflects the fact that its strength has a lower bound as
distance grows. Another property of this phenomenon is that its strength decreases asymptotically at
high energies and short distances. The mediation of this phenomenon by pions is the subject of the
Yukawa interaction. In the standard model, the theory of this phenomenon is a non-Abelian gauge
theory based on (*) SU(3) symmetry. The two aforementioned properties are confinement and asymptotic
freedom, respectively. The gauge boson of this force also participates in this force in addition to mediating
it, since the gluon also carries color charge just like quarks. For 10 points, name this force which is
explained by quantum chromodynamics, the most powerful of the four fundamental forces, which is
responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons in a nucleus.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force
Wilson loops arise in a computationally tractable model of this force that uses a lattice to simplify
path integrals. In one context, this force obeys a screened Coulomb potential named for Hideki
Yukawa and operates via meson exchange, its "residual" form. Separating particles bound by this
interaction, which is modeled by the SU(3) group, requires enough energy to form particle-antiparticle
pairs that bind to the original particles, meaning that those particles are never free, a phenomenon known as
confinement. This force becomes weak at small distances and binds quarks with gluons. For 10 points,
name this fundamental force, the most powerful of the four.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force [or strong interaction; accept early lattice QCD; do not accept "color force"]
This force was predicted by Hideki Yukawa to be mediated by the exchange of pi mesons. As
predicted by SU(3) gauge theory, the strength of this force becomes arbitrarily strong at short
distances, and it does not diminish past a certain point, two properties called asymptotic freedom and
color confinement, which explains the non-existence of free quarks. This force that is described by
quantum [*] chromodynamics and mediated by gluons acts on color-charged fermions. Overcoming the
repelling electrical forces between protons to hold the nucleus together, for 10 points, name this
fundamental force, which is about ten to the fifth times more powerful than the weak force.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force [or strong nuclear interaction; accept color force/interaction before "color"]
Hideki Yukawa estimated the range of this phenomenon to be about one fermi by modeling it as an
exchange of neutral pions. It imparts over 99% of the mass of a certain 938-MeV particle. It is described by
the gauge group SU(3). Since the theory describing it has running coupling constants, it cannot be solved
perturbatively at low energy, giving rise to asymptotic freedom. At high energies, it exhibits confinement.
Its bosons carry color charge and might couple to one another, forming glueballs. For 10 points, name this
fundamental force described by quantum chromodynamics, which is mediated by gluons and holds protons
and neutrons together in the nucleus.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force [or strong interaction; or quantum chromodynamics or QCD until "force" is read]
A "residual" form of this phenomenon is modeled through the exchange of virtual pions and may be
approximated by the Yukawa potential. This interaction's gauge group is SU(3). This interaction leads to
charmonium and the J/psi particle. Characterized by confinement and asymptotic freedom, this force,
modeled by QCD, results from color charge and is mediated by gluons. For 10 points, name this
fundamental force which holds together particles like quarks to form hadrons such as protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force
Attempts to understand this force have included Regge [REG-gee] theory, dual resonance, and string theory.
The existence of this force caused Hideki Yukawa to predict the existence of mesons, and his predictions
matched the measurements of pions [PIE-ons]. This force is currently explained by quantum
chromodynamics, which describes the interactions of gluons and quarks. Name this interaction with a very
small range that is used to explain the attractions of particles in an atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force (or strong interaction, accept color force before "chromodynamics", prompt color force after "chromodynamics")
Kurt Symanzik first suggested that this phenomenon's beta function was negative, and it forms the basis for
the volume term in Weizsacker's (VAI-sak-uhr-z) formula. Hideki Yukawa used this phenomenon to
predict the existence of pions ("PIE-ons"), and in high energy reactions this becomes weaker by the
principle of asymptotic freedom. Color confinement between quarks is a result of this force, which only
operates at distances less than ten to the minus fifteen meters, though it is able to overcome electromagnetic
repulsion. Explained by quantum chromodynamics and mediated by particles called gluons, name this
fundamental force that binds protons and neutrons together in the nucleus.
ANSWER: strong (nuclear) force [or strong interaction; accept color force before "Color"; accept color interaction before "Color"]
One of its properties, discovered by Gross, Politzer, and Wilczek, is known as asymptotic freedom.
It is characterized mathematically as a non-Abelian gauge theory of the symmetric group SU3, a
fundamental tenet of quantum chromodynamics. It is experienced by all (*) hadrons, and the
magnitude of this force drops off exponentially with distance, but at close range it is one hundred times
more powerful than the electromagnetic force. For 10 points, identify this fundamental force in which
gluons bind quarks into particles such as protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force [prompt on nuclear force; accept quantum chromodynamics or qcd until mentioned]
The OZI rule states if a diagram can be cut in two by slicing only lines carrying this force, then the process
is suppressed. It is governed by the inexact symmetry SU(3), which causes the common octets of this force
to have different masses and the different charges not to be orthonormal. A potential to explain this required
the mediators to be massive, and the mediators that Yukawa was looking for turned out to be pions.
Depicted using spirals that represent its massless carrier, this force is responsible for the asymptotic
freedom inside a proton. For 10 points, name this interaction mediated by gluons that holds together atomic
nuclei.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force
This force is represented by the third special unitary group, and the impact of high energy on this is called
asymptotic freedom. The existence of this force led Hideki Yukawa to predict the existence of mesons, and
his predictions were confirmed by the discovery of pions. The particle that mediates this force is classified
into eight types which are referred to as colors. Those particles, gluons, bind baryons together. Name this
fundamental force that holds the protons and neutrons together in the nucleus of an atom.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force
In the study of this force, the Bjorken scaling helped find the dependence of the structure function in the
large angle deflection of electrons in deep inelastic scattering. This led to the parton model. With long
wavelengths, particles that interact via this force have a full Yukawa cloud, but for short wavelengths, this
force vanishes. In a vacuum below .2 GeV, a condensate of particles that interact via this force can form.
Separating two particles that interact via this force that has asymptotic freedom requires infinite energy.
Gluons carry this force that confines colors, which means only hadrons can be seen and not the constituent
particles. For 10 points, name this force that holds quarks together in the protons and neutrons, as opposed
to the weak force.
ANSWER: strong nuclear force/interaction
Plages are located within one layer of this astronomical body, and faculae form in the canyons near
granules. Its surface temperature is 5,800 degrees Kelvin, and this is easily the most famous example
of a Class G Main Sequence star. Layers of this star include the (*) chromosphere, photosphere, and
corona, which is where its namesake flares occur. Lying 1 AU away from you right now, for ten points, this
is what star, which our planet rotates around?
ANSWER: The Sun or Sol
Around the year 2000, it was found that this object's magnetic flux did not vary widely based on latitude
and that its southern magnetic pole moved more than expected. Those results were found by the Ulysses
[yoo-LIS-ees] spacecraft, and a more recent mission to image this object is named STEREO. Its activity
was low from 1645 to 1715, which is known as the Maunder Minimum. Classified as a G-type, its activity
level typically goes through eleven year cycles judging by regions of magnetic activity seen as dark spots.
Name this object located one astronomical unit from Earth, the center of our solar system.
ANSWER: the sun
A yellow emission line in the spectrum of this object led Norman Lockyer to propose the existence of
helium. The protracted lack of certain features on this object last occurred during the Maunder
Minimum, and those features generally increase and decrease in an eleven year cycle. The mean
distance (*) to this object from Earth is equal to the astronomical unit, or au. Those previously mentioned
features are this object's namesake spots and a sudden brightening of it are known as its flares. For 10
points, identify this star at the center of our solar system that can undergo an eclipse when the Moon passes
in front of it.
ANSWER: the Sun
This body's differential rotation combines with magneto-hydro-dynamic effects to form a magnetic field
known as the Parker spiral. Thermal columns in the convection zone cause the granulation of this body. The
discovery of flavor oscillation resolved this body's namesake "neutrino problem." "Bow shock" is the
phenomenon in which the flow of plasma from this body is interrupted by a planetary magnetic field. It
creates its namesake "wind" as its corona expands into space. For 10 points, name this star that is one
astronomical unit away from Earth.
ANSWER: the sun [or sol]
Objects on the surface of this entity are described by Sporer's Law and were not as visible during
the Maunder Minimum. The SOHO spacecraft, which sends telemetry about this object to Earth,
occupies a Lagrange point of an orbit around this astronomical object. Voyager 1 and 2 passed
through a (*) termination shock, which was formed because of this object. This object emits a stellar wind
of plasma that produces the Northern Lights, and its corona is visible during an eclipse. For 10 points, name
this stellar body at the center of the solar system.
ANSWER: the sun [or Sol]
The tachocline is one layer found within this body that produces most of the neutrinos passing by Earth. The
varying locations of one notable feature on this object are described by Sporer's Law, and its movement
was used to derive the Carrington rotation. The Chandrasekhar limit is approximately equal to 1.4 times the
mass of this object, whose outer atmosphere is known as the corona. An astronomical unit is equal to
Earth's mean distance from, for 10 points, what celestial body at the center of our Solar System?
ANSWER: Sun or Sol
Elements in this object's atmosphere selectively absorb its radiation to create Fraunhofer lines in its
spectrum. The Van Allen belts are compressed by particles of charged ions emitted by this object. This
star's surface, the photosphere, is not as hot as its chromosphere and its massive corona, which is only
visible during a total eclipse. For 10 points, name this star that provides heat and light for Earth.
ANSWER: the Sun
Time variances of the differential rotation of this body create "jet streams" below the surface known as
torsional oscillations. Features of this body in the x-ray spectrum such as Moreton waves were observed by
the Yohkoh experiment. The Ulysses spacecraft studied the magnetic field lines of this body. The tacholine
separates the larger, inner radiative zone of this body from its outer convective zone. This body is
surrounded by its corona, and variations in the magnetic field of this star create its namesake flares. For 10
points, name this star, which is the closest one to Earth.
ANSWER: Sun [or Sol]
One point four times the mass of this object is the upper limit on the mass of a white dwarf. The
flavor oscillation hypothesis resolved this object's namesake neutrino problem. This object
experienced the Dalton and Maunder minima. Pierre Janssen and Norman Lockyer's observations of
this object led to the discovery of helium. This object emits a stream of charged particles that
interacts with the (*) Earth's atmosphere, its namesake "wind". For 10 points, identify this star eight
light-minutes from Earth, at the center of our Solar system.
ANSWER: the Sun [or Sol]
The Parker Spiral is the shape of this object's magnetic field. The prolonged lack of a certain feature of
this astronomical body is known as the Maunder Minimum. That feature varies over an eleven year cycle
and are this body's namesake spots. The distance between this object and the Earth provides the definition
of an astronomical unit. The outermost layer of this body is the corona, which can be seen when it is
eclipsed by the moon. For 10 points, name this body found at the center of the solar system.
ANSWER: the sun
The Homestake experiment confirmed that this object emits neutrinos. The SOHO mission was
launched to observe this object, whose magnetic field flips every eleven years. This object emits
spicules from its chromosphere and mass ejections of plasma from its (*) corona. Its photosphere
contains areas of low temperature that appear dark, its namesake "spots." For 10 points, name this star
which contains ninety-nine percent of the mass of the solar system.
ANSWER: the sun [or Sol]
This entity's magnetic field is in the shape of a Parker Spiral, and one of the unsolved mysteries
involving it is the low amount of neutrinos emitted from it. Darkened areas on this body are described by
Sporer's law. Phenomena called prominences occur on this body, whose sections include a convective
zone. Loops and mass ejections are events on its corona, and its emits a stream of charged particles called
the solar wind. For 10 points, name this star found in the center of the solar system.
ANSWER: the Sun
This object was at the center of a problem that that observed only one-third the electron neutrinos
expected. Sporer's law states that certain features of this object form a butterfly pattern when graphed. The
Maunder (MAHN-der) minimum occurred on this object. Another problem associated with this object is
how its corona is many magnitudes hotter than its surface. Helium was discovered due to unexplained
spectral lines in the photosphere of this object. For 10 points, identify this star at the center of our solar
system.
ANSWER: the Sun
The Maunder minimum refers to a lack of certain features on this astronomical body, which is
currently traveling through the Milky Way's Orion arm. One satellite sent to study it is SOHO, and
it operates on a 22-year magnetic cycle, producing an (*) 11-year cycle of its namesake spots, which are
cooler than the surrounding regions. The astronomical unit refers to the distance between the Earth and, for
10 points, what star orbited by Earth?
ANSWER: Sun [or Sol]
The butterfly diagram is a graphic representation of Sporer's law, which governs the relationship of the
frequency of these entities to their location. Individual ones are recorded by the Zurich number, also named
for its formulator Rudolf Wolf. Their activity declined during the Maunder Minimum, which coincided with
the Little Ice Age. George Ellery Hale noted the strength of the magnetic field of them, although its 11-year
cycle was noted much earlier. Consisting of an umbra and the gray penumbra surrounding it, for 10 points,
is what entity of around 4500 K, relatively colder than its surrounding regions, a dark region on the Sun's
surface?
ANSWER: sunspots
Plages are highly dense regions that surround these objects that are contrasted with faculae. These
objects are composed of the umbra and lighter penumbra. Wilson measured an increase in the appearance
of these objects since the previous 11-year Schwabe cycle. Dalton, Sporer, and Maunder all name
minimums in the activity of these objects that coincided with the Little Ice Age. Light emitted from these
objects indicates Zeeman splitting of the spectral lines. Prominences and flares occur in regions with high
activity levels for these objects that are created in pairs by the magnetic field. For 10 points, name these
relatively dark regions on the sun.
ANSWER: sunspots
One metric for these phenomena is dubbed the "Boulder" type and uses the Wolf formula, while another
type is called "International" and compiles information from more sources. The geographical distribution of
these roughly corresponds to the appearance of a butterfly. One pattern associated with them is the Schwab
Cycle and a decrease in their number, called the Maunder Minimum, contributed to the Little Ice Age. The
dark central region of these objects called the umbra, in contrast with the lighter penumbra. These objects
are caused by their namesake star's magnetic field welling up to the visible surface. For 10 points, identify
these dark regions on the surface of the sun.
ANSWER: Sunspots [accept starspots - they recently discovered some on other stars as well]
Using soundwaves from the Michelson Doppler Imager, scientists believe they can anticipate these object
two days before they appear. Attempts to track the locations of these objects results in a butterfly diagram
described by Sporer's law. Alexander Wilson discovered that these items are deep depressions on a surface,
and we now know these objects reduce convection, which lowers temperature. The center of these objects is
their umbra, and they exist on the photosphere. Name these objects associated with coronal mass ejections
and solar flares.
ANSWER: sunspots
A recent study by James Elsner and Thomas Jagger of Florida State University linked hurricane
intensity to the number of these objects. Variations in these objects are predicted by Sporer's law. Their
numbers fell drastically between 1645 and 1715, which is known as the Maunder Minimum; however,
their numbers generally wax and wane over an 11-year period. For 10 points, name these cool dark
objects that are found on the surface of their namesake object, which is located at the center of our
Solar System.
ANSWER: sunspots
The locations of these objects can be plotted using a butterfly diagram. Periods during which the
numbers of these objects have been abnormally low have been named after Wolf, Oort, and Sporer; the
most famous of those periods may have caused the Little Ice Age and is named after Maunder. The
cycle associated with these objects actually occurs over twenty-two years, eleven years for each
direction of magnetic polarity. For 10 points, name these regions of the Sun that contain large magnetic
fields, and thus appear darker than the rest of the Sun.
ANSWER: sunspots
The inverse relationship between their amplitude and period is known as the Waldmeier Effect, and Sporer's
Law can be seen in a graph of their position versus time known as the "butterfly" graph. They are counted
using the Wolf number which is equal to the sum of the individuals and ten times the number of groups.
Occurring when differential rotation creates twisted magnetic field lines that inhibit plasma mixture, they
appear as pairs with opposite polarity. For 10 points, identify these phenomena that occur in 11 year cycles,
regions of the photosphere exhibiting convection along the solar surface.
ANSWER: sunspots
The flow of gas across the surfaces of these objects is known as the Evershed effect, and the different
shadings within these objects is sometimes described by the Wilson effect. An effort to find a new
planet led Samuel Heinrich Schwabe to make detailed observations of these objects, and his work was
extended by Rudolf Wolf. We are currently in Cycle 24 of these objects, which is weak, leading to
predictions that we are entering a period similar to the Maunder minimum. The number of these
objects increases and decreases following an eleven year cycle. Name these darker regions on the
surface of the object at the center of our solar system.
ANSWER: sunspots
A "butterfly diagram" graphs the Royal Greenwich Observatory's data on the latitude of these
phenomena. A lull in their frequency in the 17th century corresponds to the Little Ice Age and is
called the (*) Maunder minimum. The number of these objects rises and falls in a roughly 11-year cycle,
and they have a temperature roughly a thousand Kelvin cooler than their surroundings. For 10 points, name
these small, dark regions on the surface of the Sun.
ANSWER: sunspots
The Wolf number is calculated using k, the observatory factor, and the number of these present at any given
time. They were very rare from 1645 to 1715, a period called the Maunder minimum. Sporer's law states
that they usually appear in higher latitudes and later move towards the equator. Their area and latitudinal
distribution is graphed against against time in a butterfly diagram, showing a cycle that repeats every eleven
years. Coronal mass ejections and solar flares occur near groups of these features. Arising from increased
magnetic activity inhibiting convection and thus lowering the surface temperature, for 10 points, name these
dark regions on the surface of the sun.
ANSWER: sunspots (prompt on starspot)
Alexander Wilson observed that these objects behave as if they are slight depressions. George Hale noted
that the magnetic polarities of these objects align east to west and periodically switch orientations. Horace
Babcock created a model that explains why these objects tend to move towards lower latitudes, as observed
by Richard Carrington. The Wolf number gives the number of these objects, which varies in an 11-year
cycle described by Sporer's law. These objects are often the endpoints of coronal loops, and they are caused
when magnetic activity inhibits convective heat transfer. For 10 points, name these dark areas of reduced
temperature on the surface of the Sun.
ANSWER: sunspots
The thermal form of this effect can occur in cluster radio halo sources due to the presence of highly
relativistic electrons and in the non-relativistic limit it can be described by the Kompaneets equation.
It is redshift-independent and occurs through the Thomson (*) scattering of photons as they interact
with thermal electrons in galaxy clusters and other reservoirs of plasma. For 10 points, name this
astronomical effect that results in an alteration of the apparent brightness of the CMBR.
ANSWER: Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect
Muon spin spectroscopy can be used to measure the London penetration depth of these materials,
and a current flowing through two of them forms a Josephson junction. The type-I form of these
materials can reach an intermediate state described by Landau, while flux pinning requires the type II 
form of them. The BCS theory posits that they are formed by the condensation of (*) Cooper pairs,
and one of these objects can be levitated over a magnet after expulsion of their magnetic fields in the
Meissner Effect. For ten points, name these materials which, when cooled below the critical temperature,
have no resistance to current.
ANSWER: superconductors (accept word forms)
Electrons can tunnel through a narrow discontinuity in one of these, even without an external voltage,
according to the Josephson effect. Their coherence length and penetration depth are predicted by the
Ginzburg-Landau theory. Those of type 2 transition gradually, and include layered perovskites like YBCO.
A theory explaining how lattice vibrations, called phonons, and Cooper pairs work together to carry current
in these materials is called BCS theory. When this type of material is cooled below its critical temperature,
it becomes perfectly diamagnetic and expels a magnetic field in the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name
this type of material with no resistance to electrical current.
ANSWER: superconductors or superconductivity
Electrons tunnel between two objects with this property in the Josephson effect. The ratio between the
penetration depth and coherence length is used in the Ginzburg-Landau theory of this property, which
characterizes materials in which electrons condense to form Cooper pairs. Objects with this property exhibit
perfect diamagnetism when they expel a magnetic field in the Meissner effect. YBCO is a high-temperature
material exhibiting this property, which comes in Type I or Type II forms. For 10 points, name this property
in which materials have no electric resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity [or superconductors]
The magnetic field of these objects can be described using the London equations, and they can be
described mathematically with the Ginzburg-Landau theory. One theory describing them notes that
electrons below the Fermi level can bind together to form Cooper pairs. YBCO is notable for acting as one
of these materials above the boiling point of nitrogen. These materials experience an expulsion of their
magnetic field in a phenomenon known as the Meissner effect and can be described by the BCS theory. For
10 points, name this type of material, which as its name suggests has an electrical resistivity of zero.
ANSWER: superconductor
When one of these materials rotates, it generates a magnetic field whose axis lines up perfectly with the axis
of rotation in an effect called the London moment.The equation del-squared H equals 1 over lambda
squared times H predicts exponential decay of the magnetic field in these materials and is called the London
equation. That equation explains an effect in which magnetic fields areejected from the interior of these
materials as they undergo phase transition. In these materials which experience the Meissner effect,
electron-phonon interaction causes electrons to be bound together into Cooper pairs. For 10 points, name
these materials which are described by the BCS theory, which, when cooled below a critical temperature,
exhibit zero resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors
Researchers from the London Centre for Nanotechnology have found a way to use an X-ray beam to create
these types of materials out of oxygen, copper, and lanthanum. Discovered by Heike Onnes, the ease of
tunneling between them is known as the Josephson Effect. The act of removing this property from materials
is called quenching and often involves boiling helium. The properties of these objects are generally
explained with BCS theory, including their use of Cooper pairs of electrons. Name these objects which
below a critical temperature do not contain any electric resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors
One type of these substances contains an Abrikosov vortex, and two of them are separated by an insulator in
a Josephson junction. Their coherence length divided by penetration depth gives the Ginzburg-Landau
parameter. Cooper pairs are the basis of the BCS theory of these substances, and YBCO is a high-
temperature type. The loss of magnetism in them is known as the Meissner effect. Kamerlingh Onnes [AW-
nuhs] discovered that mercury becomes one of these substances near absolute zero. For 10 points, name
these substances that possess no electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors
One theory of these materials accounts for their isotope effect and the size of the energy gap at the
transition temperature. Materials with this property are strongly diamagnetic and expel magnetic fields; that
phenomenon is the Meissner effect. Electrons in these materials form Cooper pairs, which are important in
the BCS theory of them. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that occurs below a critical temperature in
which a material loses all electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity
In 2008, this phenomenon was found in iron-based arsenic oxide by Hosono et al. It was the subject
of a 1986 publication by Bednorz and Muller, who reported evidence for it in an oxide of barium,
lanthanum, and copper. Replacing lanthanum with yttrium in that compound yields (*) YBCO, which
demonstrates the high temperature variety of this phenomenon, which is described by Ginzburg-Landau
theory. Materials that exhibit this phenomenon characteristically expel their magnetic fields in the Meissner
effect. Governed by BCS theory, for 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which a material exhibits zero
electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity [or just superconductors]
These substances follow an isotope effect which has the square root of the isotope's mass inversely
proportional to critical temperature. Two of these materials freely transfer electrons in the
Josephson Effect. The two types of them are distinguished by if they have one or two critical fields.
One theory governing them suggests an interaction between (*) phonons and Cooper pairs. They
generate screening currents to counteract the magnetic flux which passes through them in the Meissner
effect. Ceramic ones can form at higher temperatures. For ten points, name these substances governed by
BCS theory which have zero electric resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors
The threshold temperatures of these materials are related to the critical strength of their external
magnetic fields by Tuyn's law. The London moment is the magnetic field created when one of these is
spinning. When certain materials transition to this type of material, they expel their magnetic field in an
effect named after Meissner. In BCS theory, these are formed when electrons condense into Cooper
pairs. Coming in Type I and Type II varieties, for 10 points, name this type of material that has zero
electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors [or word forms like superconductivity]
Transition to this phenomenon is marked by a discontinuous jump in electric heat capacity. One theory
about this phenomenon introduced the concepts of coherence length and penetration depth, explaining small
perturbations in density and the decay of external magnetic fields. That theory is named for Ginzburg and
Landau. Explained by the condensation of electrons into phonon-exchanging Cooper Pairs, materials
exhibiting this phenomenon expel magnetic fields in an effect named for Meissner. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon which occurs at very low temperatures and is defined as the absence of electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity
At high material exponents, some materials with this property have two properties that are equally
interrelated by the Bean model and the E-J law. One class of substances that exhibits this phenomenon sees
its suppression only above the UCF. A pseudogap phase exists in doped cuprate-perovskite materials that
can exhibit this phenomenon. The electromagnetic free energy in a substance exhibiting this phenomenon is
minimized when the Laplacian of the H-field is equal to the H-field divided by the square of the London
penetration depth, a result that explains the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name this quantum phenomenon
in which a substance's resistance vanishes at temperatures below the critical point.
ANSWER: superconductivity
YBCO exhibits the high temperature variety of this phenomenon according to the 1987 Nobel Prize
laureates, Johannes Bednorz and Karl Muller. The free energy of this phenomenon can be expressed in
terms of psi in the Ginzburg-Landau theory. This phenomenon's Type I variety's electrons, if close to the
Fermi level, will form Cooper pairs. Robert Ochsenfeld assisted in discovering the expulsion of the
magnetic field during this phenomenon. Explained by the BCS theory and the Meissner effect, for 10 points,
name this phenomenon characterized by the disappearance of electrical resistance in various solids.
ANSWER: superconductivity [or superconductor]
This property has a coherence length proportional to the fermi velocity over the band gap, while a
length scale named for London describes the exponential damping of an incident field. Certain
Yttrium-copper oxides exhibit this property at a high temperature, and Bardeen, (*) Cooper, and
Schrieffer modeled this phenomenon in terms of paired electrons in a lattice. Materials with this property
expel all magnetic fields in the Meissner effect. First discovered in supercooled Mercury, for 10 points,
name this property of certain materials in which electrical resistance drops to zero.
ANSWER: Superconductivity [accept word forms]
In the chiral form of this phenomenon, the pairing gap wraps around the Fermi surface by multiples of 2 pi,
breaking time reversal symmetry. Materials displaying this phenomenon are frequently described by a
Gor-kov or Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian. A four-dimensional model of this phenomenon named for
Coleman and Weinberg extends another model of it, and Abrikosov used that model to describe his
namesake vortices in materials with this phenomenon. It arises due to phonon-mediated interactions creating
a boson-like particle from pairs of electrons according to BCS theory, and mercury exhibits this property
when cooled to below 4.1 kelvins. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which current flows without an
appreciable resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity [accept word forms]
Recent study on this phenomenon has included compounds combining iron with elements from the nitrogen
group, particularly arsenic, in addition to materials containing layers of copper and oxygen. Like an earlier
studied compound combining lead [led] and bismuth, those materials are classified as Type Two because
they exhibit a mixed state Meissner [MIES-ner] effect, unlike the Type One materials which completely
exclude magnetic fields. Type One materials are explained by BCS Theory, which includes Cooper pairs of
electrons. Name this phenomenon usually occurring at very low temperatures that involves the absence of
electrical resistance.
ANSWER: (type II) superconductivity (accept word forms, as long as the answer includes superconduct, do not accept "conductivity")
The London equations can be used to describe the magnetic fields of these objects. In a solid state, these
materials come in LCO or YBCO forms. The London penetration depth, studied by John Schrieffer, is the
depth a magnetic field penetrates these types of materials. According to BCS theory, below the Fermi level
they form Cooper pairs through electron-phonon interactions. These objects expel their internal magnetic
field by the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name these objects which have no electrical resistance.
ANSWER: Superconductors
The first organic material of this type produced, (TMTSF)2PF6, has been shown to resist external quenching.
Defects facilitate these materials- maintenance in a state with 300 nanometer normal cores. That is the
characteristic vortex state exhibited in one class of these materials between two critical temperatures. In
what is termed solid solutions, these devices can be constructed from lanthanum-copper-oxide or yttrium-
barium-copper-oxide. Two of them separated by a thin insulating layer can experience tunneling of
condensed electron pairs through a Josephson junction, and these devices are capable of becoming perfectly
diamagnetic at their transition temperature, which allows them to completely expel magnetic fields in the
Meissner Effect. For 10 points, name these devices typically operating at very low temperatures where they
experience no electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors [accept type II superconductors, but not "type I"]
The Kondo effect gives a key characteristic that these materials. A London penetration depth is the
distance a magnetic field penetrates in a material of this type which John Schrieffer partially
explained. Their Type II variety contain Abrikosov vortices, and their defining characteristic can be
modeled using Landau-Ginzberg theory. They exhibit the Meissner Effect, contain Cooper Pairs, and
are subject to BCS theory. YBCO is an example of one found at high temperatures. For ten points, name
these substances that have 0 resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors
Two types of these objects were delineated by Abrikosov with respect to one model, whose namesake
parameter is the ratio of the penetration depth to the coherence length. The free energy of these
objects is minimized when the Laplacian of H equals the negative square of the London penetration
depth times H, a condition that results in a form of perfect (*) diamagnetism unrelated to the expected
Lenz's law cancellation. These materials may be modeled by Ginzberg-Landau theory or by constructing a
superfluid of bosons called Cooper pairs. YBCO is a high-temperature example of these materials, which
expel magnetic fields in the Meissner effect. BCS theory governs, for 10 points, what materials that exhibit
zero electrical resistance?
ANSWER: superconductors [or superconductivity; accept word forms]
Perhaps the most famous type of material used to create these objects is YBCO. Current can jump a
Josephson junction linking two of these objects. Based on the presence of a single or double critical
magnetic field intensity, they are classified into Type I and Type II. Their formation is based on the
condensation of Cooper pairs. They expel their magnetic fields in the Meissner effect, making them
perfectly diamagnetic and thus allowing them to (*) levitate magnets. For 10 points, name these
materials which have zero electrical resistance below a critical temperature.
ANSWER: superconductors [do not accept or prompt on "conductors" or "semiconductors"]
Examples of these materials include metal-oxide ceramics, like cuprates, that have perovskite-like
structure. Impurities or defects in one type of this material, such as niobium-titanium, can "pin"
magnetic flux lines. The most sensitive magnetometers consist of a loop of these materials and two
Josephson junctions. A theory of these materials proposed that two electrons are bound pairs
coupled by phonons, the quanta of lattice vibrations, and can condense to a ground state. That theory
was developed by John Bardeen, Leon (*) Cooper, and John Schrieffer, thus being termed BCS theory.
Another type of these materials exhibits an effect in which a magnetic field surrounds, but does not
penetrate them, which allows them to levitate magnets. For 10 points, name these materials in which
current flows without resistance.
ANSWER: high-temperature superconductors [or word forms; or obvious equvialents]
These entities contain a discrete amount of magnetic flux as understood by the Ginzburg-Landau
(GINZ-berg LAND-ow) theory. The energy required to separate Cooper pairs in these entities can be
measured experimentally because of BCS theory. The interior of these entities do not have a magnetic field
because of the Meissner effect. Strong magnetic fields can cause these entities to revert back to normal
levels of resistance. For 10 points, name these entities that completely lack any electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors [or superconductivity]
Uemura plots are used to describe materials with this property, and asymptotic freedom was derived
from noting that one property of these materials has a logarithmic dependence at low values of T.
One early theory of these materials stated that the free energy of a material with this property can be
described by an order parameter. It exhibits the Kondo effect and is described by Ginzberg-Landau
theory. Another theory of this behavior explains the isotope effect and the fact that materials with this
property expel magnetic fields. It can be explained by the binding of fermions into Cooper pairs by the BCS
theory. For 10 points, identify this property that is the can be defined as the annihilation of electrical
resistance in a material.
ANSWER: Superconductivity
The distance at which a magnetic field exponentially decays by a factor of one over e in one of these
materials is known as the London penetration depth. They exist in Type I and Type II varieties, and they are
mathematically described using Ginzburg-Landau theory. One theory models these materials using the
condensation of Cooper pairs, and YBCO is a high-temperature example of them. Some of them act as
perfect diamagnets that expel internal magnetic fields through the Meissner effect, and they are governed by
BCS theory. For 10 points, name these materials that exhibit zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: Superconductors [accept Superconductivity]
When these materials interface with other materials, Andreev (ahn DREE yev) reflection can occur. A
phenomenological theory of these was developed by Lev Landau and Vitaly Ginzberg. They expel magnetic
fields from their interior in the Meissner Effect. Coming in Type I and Type II varieties, these materials are
described as the result of electrons condensing into Cooper pairs by BCS theory. For 10 points, name these
materials, which have zero resistance at low temperatures.
ANSWER: superconductors [prompt on superconductivity]
This property is exhibited by materials like YBCO and cuprate-perovskite at relatively high temperatures,
and a current is generated between two of these materials separated by an insulator in the Josephson effect.
Name this phenomenon in which a material loses all of its electrical resistance below a critical temperature.
The BCS theory explains this phenomenon using Cooper pairs.
ANSWER: superconductivity [accept word forms like superconductors]
An early model of this phenomenon, the Ginzburg-Landau theory, attempts to explain it in terms of second-order
 phase transitions. Another model accounts for the role of phonon propagation and the interaction of
phonons with electron pairs, a triply-eponymous theory formulated by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer. In
1911, the Dutch physicist Kamerlingh Onnes discovered this phenomenon while studying solid mercury at
cryogenic temperatures using liquid helium as a refrigerant. FTP, name this phenomenon that occurs in
materials at extremely low temperatures and is characterized by zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: Superconductivity
Objects with this property have a characteristic coherence length and London penetration depth, and can be
used in SQUID magnetometers. It can be described by Ginzburg-Landau theory, and a perovskite-based
compound can maintain this property at a temperature above 77K, and is called (*) YBCO. The Type I of
this phenomenon is explained as the condensation of electrons into Cooper pairs by BCS theory and this
effect causes the expulsion of magnetic fields in the Meissner effect, which can allow materials with this
property to levitate. For 10 points, materials lowered below their critical temperature have what property in
which there is no resistance?
ANSWER: superconductivity [accept superconductors]
SQUIDs take advantage of this property to detect very weak magnetic fields, and an incorrect EE
Times article claimed that Silane had this property at room temperature, though YBCO was the first
material found to exhibit this property above the boiling point of (*) nitrogen. When a compound
exhibits this property, it will expel any internal magnetic field, which is called the Meissner Effect. For ten
points, name this phenomenon, where at low enough temperatures, a substance's resistance drops to zero.
ANSWER: Superconductivity (accept word forms like Superconductor)
An important parameter of these objects can be measured with a four-point probe and slightly altered
through planar weight disparity. One type is susceptible to a phenomenon known as stripes, and their
behavior may be explained by particle undressing. Several "infinite layer" ones have recently been found to
improve on YBCO, a prominent example of these materials whose behavior was modeled in Ginzburg-Landau 
theory. Copper oxides are ceramic examples of the "high temperature" kind, and their expulsion of
magnetic fields is called the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name these materials which, below a critical
temperature, have no electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors
One theory of these materials predicts that the isotopes used have an effect on T sub C. In these
materials, electrons condensates into Cooper pairs and act like bosons according to BCS theory.
They act as perfect magnetic reflectors according to the Meissner effect, and they exhibit a certain
property below the (*) critical temperature. The yttrium-based YBCO is an example of a "high
temperature" one. For 10 points, name these materials that have zero electrical resistance at extremely low
temperatures.
ANSWER: superconductors [accept superconductivity and other word forms]
These entities- free energy is minimized when "del squared of B equals B over lambda squared," according
to the London equation. They are characterized by the coherence length and penetration depth in Ginzburg-
Landau theory, and they are classified as Type I or Type II. These substances- properties arise from phonon
exchanges between Cooper pairs of electrons, and they become perfectly diamagnetic by expelling magnetic
fields from their interior. Governed by BCS theory and exhibiting the Meissner effect, they typically exist at
low temperatures. For 10 points, name these materials with zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors
Whether these objects are one of two types is dependent on a ratio known as the Ginzburg-Landau
parameter. One theory explaining these objects claims that they create condensed boson-like electron pairs
known as Cooper pairs. Described in BCS theory, they exhibit the Meissner effect, as they lack an interior
magnetic field. For 10 points, identify these objects, which when cooled down to extremely low
temperatures, have zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors [accept word forms]
One theory that governs these materials uses an order parameter to express free energy as a second-order
phase transition as is named for Ginzburg and Landau. Another theory about these materials involved the
condensation of Cooper Pairs into the ground state and was developed by Cooper, Bardeen, and Schrieffer.
These materials were discovered by Kamerlingh Onnes, and the expulsion of magnetic fields from these
materials is known as the Meissner effect. For 10 points, identify these materials that have no electrical
resistance below a critical temperature.
ANSWER: superconductors
One phenomenon in these materials is explained by a non-zero effective photon mass within them,
and one type loses its properties at an upper critical field. One model of them gives free energy in
terms of an order parameter. Another theory of them reproduces the isotope effect and gives the
relationship between the energy gap and temperature. In that model, phonons mediate the
combination of electrons into (*) Cooper pairs. These materials expel magnetic fields in the Meissner
effect, and are divided into Type I and Type II varieties depending on the temperature of their phase
transition. Their uses include maglev trains and lossless power transmission. For 10 points, name these
materials described by BCS theory, which have zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors [or word forms like superconductivity; accept Type I superconductivity, Type II superconductivity, or high-temperature superconductivity throughout]
A model of it can be extended into the 4-dimensional Coleman-Weinberg model, and a value of one over
the square root of two for the model's namesake parameter separates two classes of it. The discovery of the
isotope effect in mercury provided experimental evidence for another theory of this phenomenon and the
ratio of the coherence length to penetration depth is the basis of the Ginzburg-Landau theory. Phonon
exchange with the crystal lattice condenses two electrons into a Cooper pair in the model that explains the
Meissner effect, known as the BCS theory. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a material has no
electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity [accept word forms]
The Abrikosov vortices form in one type of them, and one example of asymptotic freedom in substances
with this is called the Kondo effect, while . The "ideally hard" type would have infinite pinning force. One
theory to explain it combines Lev Landau's theory of second-order phase transitions with a Schroedinger
wave-equation. Materials with this property exhibit a form of superdiamagnetism described by the London
equation, an effect named for Oschenfeld and Meissner. Occuring when electrons bind together to form
Cooper pairs as explained by the BCS theory, For 10 points, name this physical property usually achieved
by cooling a material to near absolute zero temperatures, when a material exhibits zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: Superconductivity
The tunneling of electrons between objects displaying this property separated by an insulator is described in
the Josephson effect. When metals with this property are placed in a magnetic field they repel the field
demonstrating perfect diamagnetism, which can be seen in the levitation of a magnet above them. That
effect postulated by Ochsenfeld and Meissner is described in a theory of it stating that this arises from the
condensation of electron pairs. That BCS theory states this phenomenon is linked with the formation of
Cooper pairs, allowing for increased electric flow. For 10 points, name this property characterized by zero
resistance in very cold metals.
ANSWER: superconductivity [or superconductor]
Coleman and Weinberg developed a four-dimensional extension to a theory of this phenomenon
whose namesake parameter is the penetration depth over coherence length. That theory, named for
(*) Ginzberg and Landau, is contrasted with the microscopic theory of this phenomenon, which focuses on
the condensation of electrons into phonon-exchanging pairs. This phenomenon, described by BCS theory
and discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes, is exemplified by materials like YBCO. For 10 points, name
this low-temperature phenomenon, the onset of zero resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity [accept word forms]
These materials are characterized by an equation that includes a hopping integral, the t-J model, itself
derived from the Hubbard model. By comparing the coherence length to the London penetration depth, one
can determine if these materials are Type I or Type II. A critical temperature above the boiling point of
nitrogen characterizes the high-temperature type of these materials, which include cuprate perovskites like
YBCO. These materials expel interior magnetic fields through the Meissner Effect, a phenomenon
explained by Cooper pairs in the BCS theory. For 10 points, name these materials which exhibit zero
electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors [or word forms]
This property's emergence can be modeled by a second-order phase transition with an order parameter
proportional to the attractive potential between electrons. This property, which has characteristic lengths
called the penetration depth and coherence length, can be understood as the condensation of Cooper pairs.
Some materials with this property are perfect diamagnets that expel internal magnetic fields via the
Meissner effect. BCS theory models Type I materials with this property. For 10 points, name this property
in which materials have zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity [or superconductors]
One type of these devices includes perovskites. An alloy of lead and bismuth was not recognized as
one of these until the discovery of the Meissner Effect. Cooper pairs are involved the BCS Theory
that describes how another type of these devices work. Those (*) Type I devices exhibit perfect
diamagnetism, and can only work below a low critical temperature. For 10 points, name these devices that
lack electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors [prompt on superconductivity]
Phase slips allow this phenomenon to occur along with dissipation, and recent studies of this
phenomenon have looked at twisted pockets of electrons in cuprate [KOOP-"rate"]. Following a
discovery of the unconventional type of this phenomenon by Frank Steglich, research by Bednorz
and Muller uncovered examples with higher critical temperatures. In the conventional types of the
materials in which this phenomenon occurs, electrons interact with phonons [FOH-nahnz] to form
Cooper pairs, whose behavior is explained by BCS theory. Materials that have this property expel
their magnetic fields, which is a display of the Meissner effect. Name this phenomenon in which
electrical current flows without resistance.
ANSWER: superconductivity [accept word forms]
A theory governing these materials calculates their free energy as a function of the parameter psi, and one
type of these materials consists of normal cores surrounded by vortices. Described by Ginzburg-Landau
theory, these materials are limited by a factor of one over e, their London penetration depth, and the
exchange of phonons in these causes electrons to form Cooper pairs. These materials are distinguished as
Type I or Type II based on the strength of their critical fields. Substances that transform into these materials
eject a magnetic field in the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name these materials that exhibit zero electrical
resistance at low temperatures.
ANSWER: superconductors [do not prompt on or accept "conductors"]
These objects repel magnetic fields in the Meissner effect; the way in which the Meissner effect breaks
down in them classifies them as Type I or Type II. A theory about them suggests that they function because
of interacting phonons and Cooper pairs, which are pairs of free electrons. YBCO is an example of a "high 
temperature" one. For 10 points, name these materials that exhibit zero electrical resistance at very low
temperatures.
ANSWER: superconductors [accept word forms such as superconductivity]
For substances exhibiting this phenomenon, a criterion stating that the Doppler-shifted kinetic
energy of certain quasiparticles must be positive gives a critical velocity above which this behavior
cannot occur. Fluctuations in phonon density in substances exhibiting this phenomenon allow
extremely fast wave-like heat transfer, a phenomenon known as second sound. (*) Rollin films exhibit
the Onnes effect as a consequence of this phenomenon. This phenomenon can be used to separate mixtures
of helium-3 and helium-4 since they undergo a certain phase transition at different temperatures. For 10
points, name this phenomenon in which a cooled liquid can creep out of its container as it loses all
resistance to flow.
ANSWER: superfluidity
Laszlo Tisza proposed a model to explain the first instance of this phenomenon. One material that exhibits
this property has a curiously negative-sloping liquid-solid line on a phase diagram, and therefore can
undergo Pomeranchuk cooling. Substances with this property can produce a Rollin film, and one model to
explain this property posits an excitation that forms a roton. Quantum soundwaves remove internal
resistance to movement in a model of this property postulated by Lev Landau, who proposed that it takes
place below the "lambda point." For 10 points, name this property exhibited by certain Helium isotopes that
occurs when all viscosity vanishes.
ANSWER: superfluidity [accept word forms]
One useful model of these substances posited that they contain two components, one of which carries
all the entropy; that model was posited by Tisza. One hallmark of these substances is the fact that a
pressure gradient has no effect on their motion, and it is also impossible to maintain a thermal gradient
across one of these substances. Substances with this property can produce Rollin films, and when
temperature is applied on one side of a porus plug, these substances will product jets. Landau won the
Nobel Prize for his work on these substances, which only exist below the lambda point. Common
substances of this type include very cold helium-3 and helium-4, and they creep out of the sides of their
containers. For 10 points, name these substances with zero viscosity.
ANSWER: superfluidity
Materials with this property exhibit a phenomenon in which heat is transferred by waves called
second sound, resulting in a material with this property having the highest known thermal
conductivity. In 2004, a team at Penn State first witnessed this property in a solid, which at first was
thought to be a Bose-Einstein condensate. Materials with it can form a thin (*) Rollin film and creep
out of a container. This property is observed below a sharp discontinuity at 2.17 Kelvin, the lambda point.
For 10 points, name this property observed when viscosity goes to zero at low temperatures.
ANSWER: superfluidity
Kapitsa (KA-PEET-suh), Allen, and Misener showed that bosons achieve this state through
Bose-Einstein condensation. These substances exhibit quantized votex lines and can form Rollin films. The
transition to this state occurs at the lambda point. Substances in this phase have infinite thermal
conductivity. For 10 points, name this phenomenon seen in liquid helium wherein a fluid has zero viscosity.
ANSWER: superfluidity
For developing a theory of these materials with two components, Lev Landau earned the Nobel Prize, and
spin in this material can only attain certain quantized speeds. Waves of "second sound" carry this material's
extreme thermal conductivity. Its ability to form Rollin films may, upon heating, cause the fountain effect,
and it leaks out of nanometer-wide crevices. Cooper pairing enables fermions such as (*) Helium-3 to form
this material at very low temperatures, whose upper limit is the lambda point. For ten points, name this state
characterized by zero viscosity and entropy.
ANSWER: superfluids or superfluidity
In 2011, NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory found matter with this property in the core of a neutron star,
while the application of heat to a substance with this property generates waves known as second sound.
Pyotr Kapitsa won the Nobel Prize for describing this property, and Lev Landau received the Nobel Prize
for his theory of this substance lacking thermal resistance. In the Onnes (ON-es) effect, matter with this
property forms a Rollin film, which allows it to leave a container by creeping up the walls. Found below the
lambda point temperature of a substance and usually observed in helium-four, name this property in which
extreme cold produces a liquid with no viscosity.
ANSWER: superfluidity [accept word forms]
Landau proposed that excitations in these propagate via "rotons," and glitches are thought to occur in
pulsars when neutrons turn into these, explaining their unusual vorticity. They can also form Rollin films,
which exhibit the Onnes effect, wherein capillary forces acting on them are greater than gravity, and they
have infinite thermal conductivity. Occurring below the lambda point for helium, for 10 points, identify this
property exhibited by a liquid which has zero viscosity.
ANSWER: superfluid [or superfluidity]
Rotating ones have limited ranges of velocity, which is a function of the distance from the vortex. It
was originally proposed that all condensates of bosonic particles at ground states are these. Lev Landau
proposed an important theory about the phenomenon associated with them, which is exemplified by
capillary action overcoming gravity to allow these materials to creep up the walls of a container. Below
the lambda point, helium is one of these objects. For 10 points, identify these substances that exhibit
zero viscosity.
ANSWER: superfluids [accept word forms such as superfluidity]
A criterion for stability in these substances states that their relative velocity must be less than the
minimum velocity needed to induce an elementary excitation. A form of these substances has the
unusual property that it's one particle density matrix does vanish as distances go to infinity; that
property is called off-diagonal long-range order, which allows these substances to undergo Bose-Einstein 
condensation. Osheroff managed to create one of these substances from a bunch of bosons
by using a method named for (*) Pomeranchuk. Graphing the specific heat capacity versus temperature
for one of these substances shows a discontinuity at a critical temperature, and rotating these substances
quickly forms quantized vortices. These substances form Rollin films on the walls of their containers and
exist below the lambda point. For 10 points, name these substances like super cold helium-3, which lack any
viscosity below a certain temperature.
ANSWER: superfluids
The Hall-Hook model is used to describe orbital dissipation effects in these materials, and monopole
singularities in these materials lead to a geometric alteration of their texture known as a boojum.
These materials exhibit a wavelike heat transfer phenomenon known as second sound, while applying
the XY model to these phenomena show that films of them have a discontinuity in density according
to the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition. Quantized excitations known as rotons appear in these materials,
which were also modeled by Tisza. Applying the Clausius-Clapeyron relation to them is used to derive the
thermomechanical or fountain effect, by which these materials creep out of their containers. For 10 points,
name this behavior displayed below the lambda point, in which a material loses all viscosity.
ANSWER: Superfluidity
A study of atoms in two dimensions demonstrated that such a system obtains this property after going
through the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition, while Pomeranchuk cooling is undergone by one
substance that demonstrates this property, which also gives rise to the Onnes-Effect. Some substances
exhibiting this property also exhibit quasiparticles that represent quantized rotations called "rotons." Laszlo
Tisza formulated an early two-substance model of this property, though the more famous model was
developed by Landau, who first predicted that this property, first discovered by Kaptisa, Allen, and
Misener, occurs when the temperature falls below the "lambda point." Often exemplified by helium-3 and
helium 4, this is, FTP, which phase of matter when liquids can overcome friction as their viscosity becomes
zero?
ANSWER: superfluidity
Chan and Kim at Penn State discovered that crystals can display this phenomenon. One instance of this
phenomenon is distinguished by either an A or B phase, and is anisotropic. Some materials that exhibit this
phenomenon display a 30 nm Rollin film, and their movement sometimes displays the Onnes Effect.
Landau theorized that quantum sound waves are responsible for this effect, which he posited occurs below
the lambda point. For 10 points, name this property notably displayed by helium, when a liquid or gas
displays no resistance to flow.
ANSWER: superfluidity or superfluids
In some experiments, substances that lack this property form a quantum solvation shell around the substance
with this property, allowing the shell to have complete rotational freedom. When exhibiting this
phenomenon, one substance will "creep" up walls and create a Rollin film. This property occurs when
Cooper pairing takes place between atoms rather than electrons. This property was first recognized in
Helium-4 that had been cooled sufficiently. For 10 points, identify this property whereby fluids have zero
viscosity.
ANSWER: superfluidity
In SVT theory, the background vacuum of the universe is modeled as a BEC exhibiting this phenomenon.
A loss of heat in one molecule's melting named for Pomeranchuk enables the creation of one substance
that experience this effect. Quasiparticle excitations called rotons were invented in Lev Landau's
Nobelwinning
study of this phenomenon. Heat transfers in some substances experiencing this effect via the
"second sound," and a Rollin film of one of them can display the Onnes effect. Below the lambda point,
Helium-4 exhibits this phenomenon, enabling it to creep up walls. For 10 points, identify this
phenomenon in which fluids at sufficiently low temperatures have no viscosity.
ANSWER: superfluidity
A definition for one subclass of these entities offered by Keenan is having at least one broad H-alpha
emissions line. That subclass is extremely unstable since many its members frequently approach the
Eddington limit. One type of these entities, which includes Antares, must have greater than ten solar masses
and evolve following the beginning of helium fusion. These entities occupy the top of the H-R diagram.
These stars include Sirius and Betelgeuse. For 10 points, name these extremely large stars.
ANSWER: supergiants [prompt on stars before mention]
"P", "R", and "S" are used to name the processes that occur in these events, and the presence of the Balmer
series in their spectra is used to categorize them. One type of these events has an absolute magnitude of 19.3, 
allowing it to be used as a standard candle. A white dwarf may participate in one of these when it
exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit, and the Crab Nebula was formed by one of these events. They can be
caused by the core collapse of a massive star, and are categorized as either Type I or Type II. For 10 points,
name these extremely luminous stellar explosions.
ANSWER: Supernovae
One class of these entities can be used as a standard candle due to its consistent absolute magnitude of
about -19.3. Systems that become these later transition to a snow-plow phase and are absorbed by the
surrounding medium. The r and p nucleosynthesis processes become dominant in these objects, which are
thus the source of almost all heavy elements. Broadly, these occur because the specific binding energy
curve is peaked, so fusion becomes energetically unfavorable after the formation iron - that leads to the
nickel-iron core formation that proceeds the usual type of these. They can also take place in white dwarves
made to exceed a mass of about 1.44 solar masses, the Chandrasekhar limit. Classes of them include type Ia
("one a") and type II. For 10 points, name these massive explosions of stars.
ANSWER: supernovas [do not accept or prompt on "novas"; prompt on cataclysmic variables or binary systems before the end of "become dominant in these objects"]
One type of these phenomena possesses a strong silicon line at 615 nanometers and has a light curve
with an inverse relationship with peak brightness. These phenomena can include the r-process and
are classified based on whether Balmer lines are observed in the spectra. The synthesis of (*) heavy
elements is thought to occur during these events, which are classified as Type II when a white dwarf
exceeds 1.44 solar masses, or the Chandrasekhar limit. For ten points, name these stellar events occurring
near the end of a star's life which result in a massive explosion.
ANSWER: Supernovae
In the pair instability type of this cosmic event, pair production of electrons and positrons is observed inside
a population III stellar core. The light curves obtained from the majority of these events lack Balmer
absorption lines and involve Silicon II lines at 610.5 nanometers. These are the Type I forms of this event,
which occur when a white dwarf accretes matter until it is greater that 1.38 solar masses. One of the recent
examples of this event in our solar system occurred in 1987, and it was first recorded as a guest star in
1054. For ten points, name this incredibly luminous stellar process which involves the implosion of a star.
ANSWER: Supernova
The remnants of these phenomena may undergo the Sedov-Taylor phase before experiencing the snowplow
phase. Wolf-Rayet stars are the progenitors to one type of these phenomena, and the presence of hydrogen
absorption lines in their spectra leads to their Type II designation. The Type Ia ("one-A") of these
phenomena is created after the mass of a white dwarf in a binary system exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit.
The Crab Nebula is a remnant of one of these phenomena that occurred in 1054. These phenomena often
occur when a lack of electron degeneracy pressure causes core collapse to a neutron star. For 10 points,
name these luminous stellar explosions.
ANSWER: supernovas [or supernovae; or SNe]
The type II variant of these objects sees the production of elements heavier than iron. The type 1a form
of these objects occurs when a white dwarf exceeds 1.4 solar masses, known as the Chandrasekhar
(chan-DREH-suh-kar) limit. These objects are formed from the collapse of an aging star, rapidly increasing
its temperature and energy, and the remnants of these objects form a neutron star. The Crab Nebula was
formed from one of these events observed in AD 1054. For 10 points, name these large stellar explosions.
ANSWER: supernova
The two major classes of these events are divided based on the presence of Balmer lines in their spectra.
One type of them peaks at an absolute magnitude of -19.3, which enables it to be used as a standard candle.
While that type, 1a, results from the detonation of a white dwarf which exceeded the Chandrasekhar limit,
the more common type results from the core collapse of a very massive star. For 10 points, name these
extremely luminous astronomical explosions.
ANSWER: supernovae
An aberrant one of these events occurred in an object of around two solar masses, perhaps owing to
particularly rapid rotation. In one type of these events, the pdecay of nickel-56 to cobalt-56 and iron-56
generates their consistent light curves, with maximum luminosity at an absolute magnitude of negative
nineteen point three, allowing them to be used as standard candles. Core-collapse ones occur in red
supergiants and are called type II. For 10 points, name these cataclysmic events whose type 1a occurs when
massive white dwarfs accumulate enough mass from a red giant counterpart to fuel a giant explosion.
ANSWER: supernovae
These events are the likely site of rapid neutron captures called the r-process. One of these events known as
2007bi was the first pair-instability type. These events are classified into two types based on the presence of
hydrogen Balmer lines in their spectrum. Perlmutter, Schmidt, and Riess discovered the accelerating
expansion of the Universe by observing these events. Core collapse can produce one type of these events,
and the Crab Nebula is a remnant of one of these events. For 10 points, name these explosions of stars that
are more energetic than novas.
ANSWER: supernovas [or supernovae]
Different forms of these objects are noted by their lack of a silicon absorption line at 615
nanometers. They are believed to occur from the rapid and violent collapse of a tightly bound iron
core and in their aftermath they can compress to form an extremely dense (*) neutron star. The Type
Ia form of these objects typically occurs when a white dwarf exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit. The Crab
Nebula is the result of one of these objects observed by Chinese astronomer in 1054 CE. For 10 points,
name these stellar explosions.
ANSWER: supernova
Cas A was produced by one of these events, and has been dated using light echoes. One process in them
causes reactions that occur along the neutron drip line; that process is called "rapid" or "r". Perimutter et al
received the 2011 Nobel Prize for the use of these events in distant galaxies as standard candles to show
that the universe is expanding. In 1054 AD, one of them produced the Crab Nebula. One type of them,
referred to as "one-A", can occur after a white dwarf accretes to a mass greater than 1.4 solar masses,
known as the Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, almost all heavier-than-iron metals in the universe
originate in what extremely-energetic stellar events?
ANSWER: supernovae [do not prompt on or accept "nova"]
The reverse shocks associated with this process can cause the leftover material to be overionized. Neutrinos
are responsible for releasing gravitational potential energy in one type of this process. A drop in photon
pressure due to increased pair production causes the "pair instability" variety. The R- and S-processes
associated with one variety of these events are responsible for the universe's heavy elements. These events,
responsible for the formation of the Crab Nebula, are classified by their spectra into Type I and Type II. For
10 points, name this process in which a star cataclysmically explodes.
ANSWER: Supernovae [accept Supernovas; do not accept "nova(s)" or "novae"]
One type of these events is triggered by a drop in pressure caused by increased pair-production.
The Phillips relationship describes the light curve of another type of these events, which were used by
Reiss and Perlmutter to show that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. Yet other types of it
occur after (*) core collapse or when a star crosses the Chandrashekar (chohn-druh-shay-KAR) limit. The
Crab nebula is the remnant of one observed in 1054. For 10 points, name these cosmic events in which a
star explodes.
ANSWER: supernovae [or SN]
The leading 20th century research into these objects was carried out by Walter Baade [bahd], Fritz Zwicky,
and Rudolph Minkowski, a group who designed their classification schemes based on spectral lines and
proposed using these as standard candles. Cassiopeia [ka-see-oh-PEEuh] A has provided important
evidence of these, as has 1987A in the Large Magellanic [MAA-juh-LAHN-ik] Cloud. These sometimes
start with a white dwarf in a binary system, though they often occur at the creation of a neutron star or black
hole at the end of a star's lifetime. Name these energetic explosions.
ANSWER: supernova (prompt on "nova")
These events are responsible for r-process nucleosynthesis. Perlmutter's observation of these events was
used to show that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. One type of these events occurs after a
core-collapse, while another type occurs when the Chandrashekhar (shan-druh-SAY-kar) limit is exceeded.
The Crab nebula was created by one of these events observed in 1054. For 10 points, name these
explosions that occur at the end of some stars' life cycles.
ANSWER: supernova [accept more specific answers like type Ia supernova; accept supernova remnants]
For Wolf-Rayet stars, this process will lack the silicon absorption line, and these are a significant
source of the higher mass elements in the universe. The Crab Nebula was created by one of these
phenomenon; that phenomenon resulted from an accumulation of more than 1.4 solar masses of iron
in the core of a star. Another type of this phenomenon results when white dwarfs exceed the
Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, name these highly energetic explosions of a star.
ANSWER: supernova [accept more specific answers that include supernova]
The abundance of elements heavier than iron is largely due to nucleosynthesis during these events. These
events are classified based on their emission spectra and light curves. The Type I kind occurs when a white
dwarf exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit, while Type II kinds of these occur when a massive star starts to
collapse. A famous one happened in 1054 C.E. and resulted in the formation of the Crab nebula. Neutron
stars and black holes often result from these events. For 10 points, name these massive stellar explosions.
ANSWER: supernovae
A project at the Harvard Center for Astrophysics headed by Brian Schmidt searches for high-redshift
examples of these objects in order to use their light curves as tests of the expanding universe. Two subtypes
of these objects are distinguished by their absence of a strong silicon line and by serving as radio sources.
These objects are classified into two broad categories depending on whether or not they exhibit hydrogen
spectra, and the relatively uniform brightnesses of one subtype of these objects allow them to be used to
calculate the distance ladder. A white dwarf which exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit will become the Type
Ia [read: "one-A"] variety of this object, and the Type II variety of these objects form from massive stars
when a collapsing core initiates further burning of successive interior layers. For ten points, identify these
powerful explosions that occur at the end of a star's life cycle.
ANSWER: supernovae
One of these phenomena discovered in 2006 is a leading candidate to be the first-discovered
pair-instability type of them. Another type produces oxygen-rich remnants; that type, the core-collapse
type, is responsible for the creation of the Crab Nebula. The thermonuclear type of these phenomena, also
known as Type Ia (ONE-A), occurs in stars that have a mass less than one point four times that of the sun;
that limit is known as the Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, name these massive explosions in which a
star blows itself up.
ANSWER: supernovae
These events greatly increase the ambient neutron flux, causing the time scale for an element to capture a
neutron to be much shorter than the time scale for it undergoing beta decay, and unlocking the r-process.
One type of these events is classified based on the presence of the singly-ionized silicon line and can be
used as a standard candle; that is type Ia. Several types are caused by the fact that the binding energy of
iron-56 prevents fusion from occurring, thus leading to its accumulation and an eventual core-collapse. One
of these was observed in 1054 by the Chinese and left behind the Crab Nebula. For 10 points, name these
massive stellar explosions.
ANSWER: supernova
These events were used by Perlmutter to demonstrate that the Universe's expansion is
accelerating. These events, which are theorized to create and spread elements heavier than iron, can
be classified by the presence or absence of Balmer spectral lines. The first Messier object is a
remnant from a (*) 1054 example; that object is the Crab Nebula. Tycho and Kepler each observed one in
the Milky Way. For 10 points, name this powerful stellar explosions that can leave behind black holes, and
that are the dying act of heavy stars.
ANSWER: supernova
One of these events, observed in 1987 by Ian Shelton, was the source of approximately twenty neutrinos
detected at various sites. Johannes Kepler wrote about observing this kind of event over the course of 1604.
Brian Schmidt and Adam Reiss's observation of several "high-Z" types of them determined that the
expansion of the universe is accelerating. One of these events, observed by Chinese and Arabic scientists in
1054, resulted in the formation of the first object in the Messier catalog, the Crab Nebula. For ten points,
name these astronomical events in which a star explodes.
ANSWER: supernova [or any specific type of supernova; prompt on nova]
The r-process can occur in one type of these events. Because of the uniform mass at which type Ia
of these events occurs, it can be used as a standard candle. Elements heavier than iron-56 are formed
during these events. They can occur via (*) core collapse. One of these events observed by the Chinese in
1054 led to the formation of the Crab Nebula. Their remnants include neutron stars and black holes. For 10
points, identify these events in which a star explodes.
ANSWER: supernovas
They are believed to be the source of high energy cosmic rays composed of relativistic heavy nuclei and
they are the site of R-process nucleosynthesis. Their Kelvin-Helmholtz evolution involves the release of
gravitational binding energy in the form of neutrinos. One type forms in companion star systems when a
white dwarf accretes matter from a nearby red giant and approaches the Chandrasekhar limit, causing much
of the dwarf's matter to ignite. The more common Type II occurs when the core of a massive star collapses,
forming a neutron star, and rebounding in-falling matter expels the outer layers of the star, releasing enough
energy to briefly shine more brightly than an entire galaxy. For 10 points, name this astronomical
phenomenon.
ANSWER: supernovae/s
These phenomena can be classified as L or P, the latter signifying a plateau in their decay rate due to the
opacity of the ionized outer layer. Radioactive nickel and cobalt in their remnants are suggested by decay
rates of 55 and 78 days in their light-curves; both are formed by neutron capture in the r-process. A strong
silicon line in their spectra characterizes their Ia ("one a") type, which can be used as standard candles.
They result when certain degenerate stars accumulate mass beyond the Chandrasekhar limit. One observed
in 1987 in the Large Magellanic Cloud was caused by sudden stellar core-collapse followed by a
shockwave. For 10 points, name these cataclysmic stellar events.
ANSWER: supernova [do not accept or prompt on "nova"]
Methods of modeling properties these entities include the delta-m 15 [Delta M One Five] method, MLCS,
and the Stretch method. A 2010 paper by Kelly et al. showed that the Hubble residuals of these
objects are correlated with the masses of their host galaxies. That work was motivated by a 1993
Phillips paper that found a more pronounced correlation with the- "stretch factors" of these objects-
(*) light curves. Those light curves decay at the decay rate of nickel-56. They are classified in part by the
presence of a 615 nanometer silicon line in their spectra, which notably lack hydrogen lines, a characteristic
caused by their low-mass, post-main sequence progenitors. These objects, ubiquitous in cosmology as
standard candles, are often contrasted with the core-collapse variety of the same class of cataclysmic
variable stars. For 10 points, name this class of supernova that results from the detonation of a white dwarf
that has accreted enough mass to surpass the Chandrasekhar Limit.
ANSWER: Type Ia Supernovae [prompt on Supernovae before mention; prompt on Type I Supernovae at all points; "Supernova" not needed after mentioned]
Its implications were challenged in the 1935 Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen article titled "Can Quantum 
Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?" In a quantum computer, it allows for
qubits to hold not only ones or zeroes, but many combinations of the two. Generally, it states that if a
particle can be in each of two states, then it can be in a combination of the two states. FTP, name this
quantum principle, famously illustrated by Schrodinger's simultaneously living and dead cat, and whose
consequences include quantum entanglement and spooky action-at-a-distance.
ANSWER: Quantum Superposition
Nocturnal insects have compound eyes known as this "eyes". A principle with this name in mathematics
and
are solutions,
states that for a linear homogenous ordinary differential equation, if
is also a solution. The quantum type of this states that a physical system partially exists in
all theoretically possible states, but only gives a result corresponding to one configuration when observed.
The law of this in geology states that sedimentary layers are deposited in time sequence. Identify this
principle which that the net response caused by multiple stimuli is the sum of the responses the stimuli
would create individually.
ANSWER: superposition
A formal technique that takes advantage of these is the method of Green's functions, which works because
any function can be stated as a sum of delta functions. One of these greatly facilitates finding the
electromagnetic field in a linear medium; a second, related one of these is used to solve multi-source
circuits by sequentially ignoring all sources but one. For 10 points, name these principles from physics that
state that, for linear systems, the response to a set of inputs is just the sum of the responses to each input.
ANSWER: principles of superposition [accept superposition theorems or other close equivalents; prompt on additive principles or other close equivalents]
According to the mass continuity equations for a fluid, given two points in a fluid, the product of
density, fluid velocity, and this quantity at those points will be equal. Fourier's law of conduction states that
the change in big Q with time is negatively proportional to the product of this quantity and the derivative of
temperature with position. The Stefan-Boltzmann constant has units of power divided by the product of the
fourth power of temperature and a measure of this quantity. Teslas are equivalent to one weber per this
measure and is thus used to measure magnetic flux density. Kepler's second law states that orbits sweep out
equal this in equal time. For 10 points, name this quantity which can be reported in square meters.
ANSWER: surface area [or cross-sectional area; or square meters until it is read; prompt on "surface"; prompt on "cross-section"]
The spontaneous breaking of this requires two particular bosons to be massless, which in turn requires the
Higgs mechanism to match measured results. The fundamental use of this in Standard Model physics
involves the reversal of charge, parity, and time. The similarities between bosons and fermions is the super
type of this. This concept involves the lack of change during transformations. Name this quantum physics
concept which also has an everyday meaning that has radial or bilateral forms, applying to objects that can
be reflected over a line without change.
ANSWER: supersymmetry
The Konishi anomaly occurs in gauge theories incorporating this, and renormalizable couplings in
theories incorporating it do not violate R-parity. Adding this theory to quantum mechanics allows
analyzing systems using partner Hamiltonians, which have corresponding eigenstates. Adding it in a
namesake minimal extension of the (*) standard model creates the phenomenon of gauge coupling
unification, in which makes the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces approximately equal at high
energies, solving the hierarchy problem. Postulated by Murayama, Zumino, Wess, and several others, this
theory predicts the existence of charginos, gluinos, gravitinos, and the like, and this theory postulates that
the lightest possible partner comprises dark matter. FTP, name this theory, which pairs every observed
particle with another one that differs by spin one half.
ANSWER: Supersymmetry or SUSY [do not accept "String theory"]
The "charge-time-parity" variety of this property is conserved if every particle has the same mass as its 
antiparticle, though part of this must be violated due to the significant amounts of baryonic matter in the
universe. Salvinorin B ethoxymethyl ether is a hallucinogenic drug sometimes known by this name.
Noether's theorem states that each one of these a system possesses leads to a conserved quantity. In biology,
this refers to the balanced distribution of duplicate body parts. Identify this property which, in geometry, is
possessed by an object that is invariant under a certain transformation.
ANSWER: symmetry
Kramers- theorem states that a system must be doubly degenerate if its Hamiltonian has one type of this
property. Any field theory in which this property holds for the Lagrangian, but not for the physical vacuum,
must contain * massless bosons by Goldstone's theorem. A local gauge's spontaneous loss of this property
results in the acquisition of mass by W and Z bosons in the Higgs mechanism. Noether's theorem states that
there is a conservation law associated with every continuous one of these. The existence of corresponding
bosons and fermions is its hypothetical "super " variety. FTP name this property, invariance under
transformations.
ANSWER: Symmetry (accept T-symmetry or Time Reversal Invariance until *, accept invariance throughout)
Potential energy curves corresponding to electronic states of the same this cannot cross. In quantum
mechanics, Wigner showed that this type of operation is always represented by a unitary or antiunitary
transformation. Also in QM, operations of this type must be a norm-preserving bijection from a Hilbert
space of states to itself. When this concept is applied to an action of a system, a corresponding conservation
law is produced according to Noether's theorem. Nambu-Goldstone bosons are characteristics of one type of
it being spontaneously broken, which is how the Higgs mechanism imparts mass. It can be applied to
charge, parity and time. For 10 points, name this concept from physics whereby certain features of physical
systems are preserved during transformations.
ANSWER: symmetry transformation [or symmetry operation; or continuous symmetry]
Any tensor can be turned into one having this property by summing over all permutations of its indices, and
a variant of this property can be created by extending the Poincare group with the fermionic operators. As a
result of this property, in the case of the non-degenerate Stark effect only the terms quadratic in the electric
field contribute because the selection rule for the angular momentum quantum number causes the linear
terms to vanish. If every particle has the same mass as its anti-particle, the "charge-time-parity" variety of
this property is conserved in any interaction. An extension of this property assigns a fermionic partner to
every boson, and a conserved current corresponds to an instance of this property according to Noether's
theorem. Hypothesized to exist in a "super" variety, for ten points, identify this property of a physical
system, which refers to its invariance under some transformation, such as reflection about an axis.
ANSWER: symmetry
A formalism for deriving the power spectrum of this phenomenon in the ultrarelativistic classical
regime was developed in 1945 by Julian Schwinger, who noted that its power spectrum increases up
to a critical frequency, after which it declines exponentially. The angular distribution of power due to
this phenomenon is concentrated in a cone with angle inversely proportional to the (*) gamma factor,
and in the relativistic regime, this phenomenon is strongly polarized in the plane of motion. The total energy
produced by this phenomenon is proportional to the fourth power of gamma, and it is commonly produced
using periodic magnetic fields created by structures called undulators. For 10 points, identify this
phenomenon, the radiation produced by a radially accelerated charged particle.
ANSWER: synchrotron radiation
The frequency spectrum of this phenomenon is proportional to the integral from frequency over cutoff frequency to infinity of the modified Bessel function of the first kind of order five-thirds. The total
power generated by this process is proportional to to the electron charge squared time the sixth
power of the Lorenz factor; in the non-relativistic limit, that power is proportional times the square
of the acceleration. Those limits respectively give the Lienard and (*) Larmor formulas. Wigglers are
designed to produce this phenomenon by creating a periodic vector potential in a beam path. The classical
limit of this behavior for circular causal motion is cyclotron radiation. For 10 points, identify this
phenomenon, the production of radiation by relativistic charges accelerated by a magnetic field.
ANSWER: synchrotron radiation [prompt on bremsstrahlung; prompt on cyclotron radiation]
Siemens purchased the rights to an improved mercury-vapor lamp that this man developed in the
late 1920s. He pre-empted Ernest Lawrence with a patented design for a cyclotron. This man wrote
the speculative work The Voice of the Dolphin as part of his late-in-life peace campaign. With a
German colleague, he developed diffusion, absorption and electromagnetic solutions to the problem
of (*) refrigeration. This man developed hot-atom chemistry with Thomas Chalmers, which could create
radioactive isotopes. He patented an absorption refrigerator with a German scientist who would later
deliver a letter he wrote to FDR. For 10 points, name this Hungarian-born author of a letter signed by
Albert Einstein advising the US to start an atomic bomb program.
ANSWER: Leo Szilard [or Szilard Leo or Leo Spitz]
A coincident D-brane/anti-D-brane pair contains excitations of these particles, and one of Sen's
conjectures states that the contributions from these particles- potential gives that configuration a
zero energy density. The set of solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation corresponding to these
particles is incomplete, and these particles cannot be localized in space. The (*) Feinberg
reinterpretation principle partially resolves a paradox associated with these particles that must always lose
energy via Cherenkov radiation. If these particles exist, as a consequence of their defining property they
have imaginary mass, and these particles could violate causality via their namesake "telephone paradox."
Contrasted with luxons and bradyons, for 10 points name these hypothetical particles that move faster than
light.
ANSWER: tachyons
One function denoted by this letter, when taken of n, multiplied by q to the n, and summed over all integers
greater than 1, gives the Dedekind eta function to the 24th power; that function is named for Ramanujan.
One particle with this name can generate "double-bang" and "lollipop" events and was detected in
Fermilab's DONUT collaboration. A statistic named for this letter is calculated by finding the difference
between concordant and discordant pairs of ranks, and is also named for Kendall. This letter denotes proper
time, and a subatomic particle known by this Greek letter is the heaviest lepton yet discovered. It is not
MAP2, but a defective protein of this name can lead to neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease. It is
also used in physics to denote the time constant and torque. Identify this Greek letter analogous to the letter
T.
ANSWER: tau
SCUBA was used in 2004 to identify a very cold dust disk around this celestial body that may contain up to
10 times more material than all of the cometary and asteroidal material of our own solar system. Because of
this large disk, astronomers have focused on searching for a large Jupiter-like body orbiting it in order to
deflect material from other potential bodies, meeting with no success so far. It was also one of the targets of
Project Ozma along with its closer sister star, Epsilon Eridani. Because of the large amount of debris around
it, it is unlikely that any planets discovered by the TFP will inhabit life. For ten points, name this star about
12 light-years from Earth found in a constellation known as "The Whale."
ANSWER: Tau Ceti
Lee and Yang proposed its conclusions could be validated through the demonstration of anisotropy
in beta rays emitted through decay of mirror (*) cobalt-60 nuclei. That experiment was carried out at the
Cryogenics Physics Laboratory by Madame Wu. A two-dimensional Dalitz plot demonstrated that the
particles involved possessed zero spin and was used to map pion decay outcomes. For 10 points, parity
violation in the weak decay of two types of K mesons resulted in what problem of nuclear physics?
ANSWER: tau-theta puzzle (either order) (prompt on charge-parity violation)
One object in this constellation is believed to share a common origin with the cluster in Cancer called
Praesepe, and its lambda star, Ethor, is an eclipsing binary similar to Perseus's Algol. This
constellation brackets one of closest major regions of star formation along with the nearby Auriga,
and its theta star is the brightest in the (*) Hyades. John Bevin formally discovered an object in this
home to open cluster M45 that was first sighted on Earth in the year 1054, and it contains a notable red
giant generally identified as its "eye." This constellation is located northeast of Orion and contains the Crab
Nebula. For 10 points, name this home of the Pleiades cluster and the star Aldebaran, traditionally
visualized as a bull.
ANSWER: Taurus [accept "the bull" before mentioned]
This constellation names a meteor shower that originates from the Comet Encke. A "complex"
spanning this constellation and Auriga is a notable star formation region. An Asymptotic Giant
Branch star in this constellation designated RV is the prototype of a class of pulsating variables. The
prototype and namesake for low-mass protostars is this constellation's "T" star. A "V" shaped
cluster of stars including (*) Ain form the face of this constellation. That cluster, the Hyades, joins
another cluster in this constellation which contains Alcyone and Electra, the Pleiades. The brightest star of
this constellation, Aldebaran, is known as its "eye." For 10 points, name this zodiac constellation which
contains the Crab Nebula and symbolizes a bull.
ANSWER: Taurus [prompt on "Tauri" and "RV Tauri"]
One meteor shower associated with this constellation lasts from June 5 to July 18 and is identified by the
letter "Beta", and another meteor shower associated with this constellation is linked with the comet Encke
and divided into "Northern" and "Southern" branches. This constellation contains Maia and Alcyone, both
members of the Pleiades open star cluster, and its orange alpha star is the giant Aldebaran. For 10 points,
name this constellation containing the supernova remnant Crab Nebula and known as "the bull".
ANSWER: Taurus
This constellation contains NGC 1514, the Crystal Ball Nebula, whose observation refuted William
Herschel's early theory of nebula formation. One star in this constellation, Elnath, was once also considered
part of its neighboring constellation Auriga. Its "T" star is the namesake of a class of contracting protostars.
That star lies within this constellation's Hyades cluster, and it contains the first Messier object, the Crab
Nebula. Together with its brightest star (*) Aldebaran, this constellation also contains M45, or the Pleiades.
For ten points, name this zodiac constellation west of Aries, astrologically represented as a bull.
ANSWER: Taurus
A lunar mountain range of this name is located in the Sea of Serenity. One star in this constellation,
Alcyone, is the center of a smaller object known as Subaru by the Japanese, and another object in this
constellation is accompanied by the newly discovered NP 0532. The alpha star of this home of the Hyades
cluster is a red giant whose name is Arabic for "the follower", Aldebaran. This constellation contains object
M45 and object formed by a 1054 supernova. The home of the Pleiades star cluster and the Crab Nebula,
for 10 points, name this constellation located between Aries and Gemini named for the bull.
ANSWER: Taurus
A nebula that seemingly disappeared after one observation, dubbed Struve's Lost Nebula, is located in this
constellation. That nebula is close to one star in this constellation that is a prototype for small, young premain sequence stars; that star is this constellation's T star. This constellation's alpha star is a red giant with
an Arabic name for "follower," as it follows the Pleiades star cluster which is also located in this
constellation. That star is named Aldebaran. Its beta star is known as Elnath, which refers to the "butting" of
its horns. For 10 points, name this constellation with a name that is Latin for "bull."
ANSWER: Taurus
The micro-variety of this phenomena is described as the manipulation of molecules, atoms, and subatomic
particles. Miroslaw Magola, a "magnetic man", was investigated by researchers from the Max Planck
Institute, Mindlab, and others for exhibiting this phenomena. Some claim that proof of this phenomena
would violate the inverse square law, the second law of thermodynamics, and the conservation of
momentum. This term was coined by publisher Henry Holt in his book On the Cosmic Relations and
adopted by parapsychologist J.B. Rhine, who used it in connection with experiments to determine if a
person could influence the outcome of falling dice. Possibly explained by a torsion field and also called
remote influencing, remote mental influence, and anomalous perturbation, for 10 points name this
phenomena whereby people exhibit the ability to move things with their minds.
ANSWER: telekinesis [prompt on TK; accept psychokinesis before mentioned; prompt on PK]
One example of this device uses a parabolic primary mirror and hyperbolic secondary mirror and was
invented by Laurent Cassegrain. There are three primary types of this device: refracting, reflecting and
catadioptric. Hans Lipperhey is commonly associated with the invention of this device. An improved
version of this device that consisted of a convergent objective lens and a divergent eyepiece lens was
created by Galileo. For 10 points, identify this device commonly used to magnify and observe astronomical
objects.
ANSWER: optical telescope [or reflecting telescope before it is read]
A technique utilizing satellites that lets two or more of these devices work as a single large one relies on an
atomic clock, usually a hydrogen maser, and is based on Roger Jennison's closure-phase techniques. Very
Long Baseline Interferometry is one strategy for using these devices, one type of which is named for
Schmidt and Cassegrain. The optical variants of these devices come in reflecting and refracting types,
named for Newton and Galileo respectively. For 10 points, name these devices that form magnified images
of celestial objects.
ANSWER: telescopes [accept radio telescopes or optical telescopes]
This man blamed Jane Fonda for a heart attack in a Wall Street Journal piece called "I was the only
victim of Three-Mile Island." He had a proposal to create an artificial harbor at Port Hope, Alaska
in Project Chariot. He won the first Ig Nobel Prize for Peace because of his work developing what he
called a "Super." This man is the second namesake of an effect which breaks the degeneracy of
coordination complexes by elongating (*) one axis. He controversially testified that he opposed extending
a Top-Secret clearance during Oppenheimer's security hearings. This leader of Operation Plowshares, a
program for the peaceful use of nuclear weapons, was a supporter of SDI. He co-names a fission-fusion
nuclear bomb design with Polish physicist Ulam. For 10 points, name this Hungarian-American physicist
and "Father of the Hydrogen Bomb."
ANSWER: Edward Teller [or Teller Ede]
The Eotvos rule relates this quantity to surface tension, and the Einstein relation states that the diffusion
coefficient is proportional to this quantity. One of these named for Boyle is the value for which the second
coefficient of the virial equation is zero. This quantity is raised to the fourth power in the Stefan-Boltzmann
law for blackbody radiation, and this quantity will eventually approach equilibrium for objects in contact
according to the zeroth law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this quantity usually measured in
degrees or Kelvins.
ANSWER: temperature
A drop in this quantity in the universe allowed for the ability to form hydrogen atoms. The value
for this quantity known as the lambda point separates helium I from the superfluid helium II. This
quantity is related to a particle's speed by the (*) Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, and is measured by
the Rankine scale. Gay-Lussac's Law states that pressure is directly proportional to it. For 10 points, name
this quantity measured by the Kelvin and Fahrenheit scales.
ANSWER: temperature
This quantity and the change in free energy change are plotted on an Ellingham diagram. The conjugate
variable of entropy is this quantity, which is related to surface tension by the Eotvos rule. It decreases for
gases in the Joule-Thomson effect, and a voltage is created by differences in this quantity in the Seebeck
effect. Pressure and this quantity appear on a phase diagram. Average kinetic energy depends on this
quantity, which is constant in isothermal processes. For 10 points, name this quantity measured on scales
named for Celsius and Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: temperature
Derivation from the second law of thermodynamics yields that this quantity is equal to change in energy
over the change in entropy. Root mean square speed is defined as the square root of three times the gas
constant times this quantity over molecular mass. An isothermal process is one in which this quantity stays
constant. Measuring the average amount of kinetic energy, for 10 points, name this quantity that can be
measured in Rankines, Kelvins, and degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: temperature
In RTGs, the generation of a gradient of this quantity by radioactive decay is converted to a voltage via the
Seebeck effect. This quantity can become negative in quantized spin systems. One scale for it is defined by
the triple point of water. An ideal gas particle's kinetic energy is three-halves Boltzmann's constant times
this quantity. Heat capacity is the ratio of heat added to the change in it. The third law of thermodynamics
predicts a lower limit on this quantity, which is known as absolute zero. For 10 points, name this quantity,
which is identical for any two bodies in thermal equilibrium, and which may be measured in degrees Kelvin.
ANSWER: temperature [or absolute temperature; do not accept "heat" or "energy"]
A form of this quantity described by the word "brightness" is used to approximate a grey body by a black
body. A particular wavelength is related to this quantity by Wien's displacement law. This variable is
inversely proportional to thermodynamic beta. It is formally defined as the derivative of internal energy
with respect to entropy. An equivalence relation involving it is established by the zeroth law of
thermodynamics. The efficiency of the Carnot cycle is a function of this property of the reservoirs. Specific
heat is the energy required to cause a given amount of change in this quantity. For 10 points, name this
property of a material that can be measured in kelvins.
ANSWER: temperature
In statistical mechanics, this quantity is the conjugate variable to entropy, and for a system at
constant volume, it is defined as the derivative of internal energy with respect to entropy. The Van-t
Hoff equation evaluates the changes in the dissociation constant associated with changes in this
quantity, which decreases in throttling processes in real gases due to the (*) Joule-Kelvin effect and
which is held constant in Boyle's law. The third law of thermodynamics states that entropy approaches a
minimum as this quantity approaches absolute zero. For 10 points, identify this quantity which remains
constant in isothermal processes and can be measured in Kelvins or degrees Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: temperature [prompt on T]
The change in the ratio of this quantity to Gibbs free energy is equal to the negative of enthalpy divided by
this quantity squared. An engine's maximum efficiency is equal to one minus the ratio of this quantity
measured at two different reservoirs according to Carnot's theorem. The energy of a blackbody is
proportional to the fourth power of this quantity by the Stefan-Boltzmann law. Three-halves times this
quantity times the Boltzmann constant equals a particle's average kinetic energy. The third law of
thermodynamics states that entropy is zero at the unattainable lower bound of this quantity, known as
absolute zero. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in kelvins.
ANSWER: absolute temperature [prompt on "T"]
This quantity is the intensive natural variable of Helmholtz free energy. In statistical mechanics, the
canonical ensemble holds this quantity constant. The internal energy due to a quadratic degree of freedom
is proportional to this quantity according to the equipartition theorem, which sets that energy as one-half
Boltzmann's constant times this quantity. The negative conductivity times the gradient of this quantity
appears on one side of Fourier's law. Black body radiation is proportional to this quantity raised to the
fourth power according to the Stefan-Boltzmann law. Entropy is multiplied by this quantity when
calculating Gibbs free energy. Heat capacity measures the energy necessary to change this quantity. For 10
points, name this quantity measured in Kelvins.
ANSWER: temperature
Rocard gives a theoretical upper value for this quantity, which is violated in Hawking evaporation of
a black hole. The Linde process makes use of an effect which causes this value to drop when volume
increases, and a gradient in this quantity can produce a emf, those effects are named for JouleThompson and (*) Seebeck. The Stefan-Boltzman law relates flux to the fourth power of this quantity.
The Maxwell distribution gives a velocity distribution for a given value of this quantity, and along with
pressure this is plotted on a phase diagram. For 10 points, name this quantity measured by the Kelvin and
Celsuis scales.
ANSWER: Temperatur
By the free-electron model, the resistivity of a metal is proportional to the square root of this
quantity. Wien's Law states that the peak wavelength for blackbody emission is proportional to one
over this quantity. By the Stefan-Boltzmann Law, the flux emitted by a blackbody is proportional to
the (*) fourth power of this quantity. The rate of heat transfer is proportional to the gradient of this quantity,
which is related to the average kinetic energy of a system's molecules. For 10 points, name this quantity
measured in scales named after Kelvin and Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: temperature [or T]
Systems with a discrete upper energy limit can possess negative absolute values of this quantity. This
quantity is defined as one over the energy partial derivative of the entropy; its reciprocal is referred
to as beta. Mean kinetic energy is defined as one half times the Boltzmann constant times this
quantity. The (*) third law of thermodynamics predicts an unattainable lower limit for this quantity, which
is a measure of the average energy in a substance due to heat, called absolute zero, and this quantity is equal
for two bodies in thermodynamic equilibrium. For 10 points, name this quantity, measured in scales like
Kelvin.
ANSWER: temperature
Deriving this value from the second law of thermodynamics yields the value d-E over d-S, where E is
energy and S is entropy. According to the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the value for this property in an
ideal gas equals two-thirds the average kinetic energy of the gas over k, the number of moles times the ideal
gas constant. The zeroeth law of thermodynamics involves three reservoirs with the same value for this
property, and it appears along with number of moles and the gas constant on one side of the ideal gas
equation. For 10 points, name this property measured on the Rankine, Fahrenheit, and Celsius scales.
ANSWER: temperature
This quantity can assume a negative value after population inversion. The mnemonic "oh be a fine girl
kiss me" places stars in decreasing values for this quantity, which is plotted with color against absolute
magnitude in a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. This quantity is directly related to the kinetic energy of
particles and can be found by dividing PV by nR when rearranging the ideal gas law. The Kelvin scale for
this quantity is based on the concept of absolute zero, its lowest attainable value. For 10 points, name this
quantity measured in Celsius.
ANSWER: temperature [prompt on T]
This variable appears in the denominator of thermodynamic beta. In a throttling process, the change in this
quantity is described by the Joule-Thomson effect. Three-halves times this variable is proportional to the
kinetic energy of a gas. Equilibrium with respect to this quantity is transitive according to the zeroth law of
(*) thermodynamics. Gases have a standard value for pressure and this quantity, which is zero on one scale.
One can add 273 to change between two scales for this quantity, while another conversion can be made by
multiplying by nine-fifths and then adding 32. For 10 points, name this quantity with Kelvin, Celsius, and
Fahrenheit scales.
ANSWER: temperature (prompt on "T")
For an accretion disk, this quantity is related to the surface mass density times the disk's velocity all raised
to the one-fourth power. For a planet in equilibrium, this quantity is related to one minus the albedo over
four all raised to the one-fourth power. It is not luminosity, but O type stars have the highest value of this
quantity for all stars. The irradiance of a blackbody is equal to this quantity raised to the fourth times the
Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Leftover radiation from the big bang has an average value of 2.73 on one scale
for this quantity. For 10 points, what quantity is commonly measured in Kelvins and degrees Celsius?
ANSWER: temperature
Wien's displacement law states that the wavelength of blackbody radiation is inversely proportional to this
value, while the Stefan-Boltzmann law claims the total power is proportional to it raised to the fourth
power. The average kinetic energy of a molecule is equivalent to three-halves times Boltzmann's constant
times this value. This value increases proportionally to the amount of heat added to a system over the heat
capacity. For 10 points, name this physical property, given in degrees Celsius or Fahrenheit, that is
conventionally used to denote how hot or cold something is.
ANSWER: temperature
The most common scale to measure this quantity was developed by a Swedish astronomer, but had its
order flipped by Carl Linnaeus. Another scientist who names a scale of this quantity developed the most
commonly used heat-to-work cycle. A bimetal strip can be used to measure this quantity, because one of
the metallic layers will bend more than the other in response to changes in it. For 10 points, identify this
quantity measured in Rankine, Celsius, and Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: temperature
In conductors, the application of this quantity gives rise to heat flow in the opposite direction
according to an analog of the Hall effect named after Righi and Ledu[10] When it is applied
perpendicular to a magnetic field, a mutually perpendicular transverse electric field is generated by
the (*) Nernst effect. It is related to the reversible change in heat content by the Thomson coefficient. When
it exists between the junctions of two dissimilar conductors a current is generated by the Seebeck effect. For
10 points, name this quantity that gives the direction and rate of temperature change.
ANSWER: temperature gradient
When an object is wrapped around a round object by static friction, this quantity grows exponentially with
angle, and when divided by cross-sectional area this quantity yields stress. In an Atwood machine, these
forces oppose gravity and can be set equal to each other to solve the (*) pulley system. In a pendulum, this
force moves the weight sideways, although it does no work, as it is perpendicular to the weight's motion. Its
effects on springs are described by Hooke's law, and if it is absent, the system is said to be in slack. For 10
points, what is this force everywhere inside a string, contrasted with compression?
ANSWER: tension
Subtracting the magnetic pressure from this quantity gives the Lorentz force, and Laplace's Law states that
pressure is equal to twice this quantity over the radius. In free-body diagrams, it must be represented as a
vector pointing away from the object of interest because it can never push, only pull. A two-dimensional
form allows small animals to walk on water and is known as the "surface" variety. For 10 points, identify
this type of force exerted by taut strings, cables, and cords.
ANSWER: tension [accept magnetic tension before "Laplace" is read; prompt on force]
A multilinear map from any space has a corresponding unique linear map from the corresponding
space containing these objects, by a universal property. The force per unit volume from a charge
distribution equals the difference between the divergence of one of these objects and time-derivative
of the Poynting vector, and that example is named for Maxwell. When these objects are composed of
both (*) vectors and covectors, they have contravariant and covariant orders, represented by lowered and
raised indices. Another object of this type gives the flux of the 4-momentum, and is symmetric with rank 2,
like the moment of inertia type of this object. For 10 points, name these objects often described as
multidimensional arrays.
ANSWER: tensors [or tensor product; or stress tensor]
In order to measure the charge of the electron, this condition was achieved in the Millikan oil-drop
experiment. A much larger one exists for creeping flow, owing to the linear dependence of a certain force
rather than quadratic dependence. It increases about one percent with every one hundred fifty meters of
altitude due to lower air density, and it may be decreased by increasing surface area. Arising due to the drag
force growing to cancel the force of gravity, and resulting in no net acceleration, for 10 points, identify this
upper limit on a falling object's speed.
ANSWER: terminal velocity
Sir George Stokes measured this quantity for small spheres, allowing him to compute the viscosity of fluids.
It is calculated by equating the buoyant force, as determined by viscous drag, with the force of gravity on an
object, making net force and acceleration zero. FTP, 614 miles per hour is the skydiving world record set by
Joseph Kittinger for what maximum speed attained by an object falling through a fluid?
ANSWER: terminal velocity
This person considered his most important invention to be a boundary layer turbine that has several disks in
a chamber but does not have blades. He is also the namesake of an MKS unit that measures a quantity
whose divergence is zero according to Gauss's Law for Magnetism. That unit of magnetic flux density
equals ten thousand gauss and is used to measure the strength of magnetic fields. Name this inventor who
helped popularize alternating current and produced a device that can produce high voltage alternating
currents, his namesake coil.
ANSWER: Nikola Tesla
This man built a powerful magnifying transmitter that could send out wireless waves that carried
energy for miles, without wires. This man beat Marconi to inventing and patenting the radio. This
man discovered the rotating magnetic field and used it as the basis for his alternating current induction
motor. His pushing for the use of alternating current to send electricity long distances led to a schism with
Edison, and this man names the SI unit for the magnetic field. For 10 points, identify this Croatian physicist
whose namesake coil produces a high voltage.
ANSWER: Nikola Tesla
This scientist built on the work of Wilhelm Roengten by using Crookes tubes to experiment with Xrays. With support from George Westinghouse, he advocated a substitute for the Edison-backed DC
power transmission: (*) alternating current. This physicist gives his name to the SI unit of magnetic field.
For 10 points, identify this scientist who built a high-current device that produces a plasma discharge called
his namesake coil, a Serbian-American.
ANSWER: Nikola Tesla
One of these is proved by Boltzmann's H-theorem, and itself disproves the possibility of T-symmetry;
Stanley Meyer was sued by two investors after claiming to circumvent these in water. Hydroelectric
plants can often avoid a [*] thermal bottleneck, a direct result of the second of them. The alignment of
perfect crystals at absolute zero is described by the third one of these, while the so-called "zeroth" one is
essentially a transitive property for systems in thermal equilibrium. For 10 points, name this set of laws that
describes the transfer of heat and work.
ANSWER: Laws of thermodynamics
One of these statements is sometimes known as Nernst's theorem. Another of these statements states that
if two systems are in equilibrium with a third system, then they are also in equilibrium with each other. Yet
another of these statements states that the entropy of a perfect crystal is zero at absolute zero. The first one
deals with the principle of conservation of energy. For 10 points, name this set of laws, the second of which
roughly states that entropy always increases.
ANSWER: laws of thermodynamics
One of these principles follows from the Nernst Heat Theorem, which discusses that Gibbs Free Energy and
enthalpy approach each other at small temperatures. According to another one of these principles, a heat
engine with one hundred percent efficiency is impossible. Another of this set of principles discusses the
conservation of energy with regards to heat and work done by its surroundings. For 10 points, name these
four laws of physics, which discuss the conversion of energy into work and heat.
ANSWER: laws of thermodynamics (accept Third Law of Thermodynamics until "another")
A recent paper by Adel Awad notes that using certain values for the boundary metric in Kerr-AdS
blackholes may result in the violation of this principle. For a system with heterogenous components, its
mathematical formulation includes a term for the sum of the chemical potentials of the particles times the
number of particles itself. It was first stated in an 1850 paper by Rudolf Clausius in which he showed that
there was a contradiction between the ideas of Sadi Carnot and the basic principle of this law. For 10 points,
identify this law of thermodynamics which states that the change in internal energy is equal to the work
work done on the system, which ultimately implies that the energy of the universe is constant.
ANSWER: First Law of Thermodynamics
Along with Fourier's equation, this law can be used to derive a parabolic partial differential equation
that describes diffusion. When mass flow rate is constant, this law is often expressed as the SFEE,
which contains an enthalpy plus one-half velocity squared plus gravitational acceleration times
elevation term. In the statement of this law, two process functions commonly appear as inexact
differentials and can be set equal to each other for an ideal gas undergoing an isothermal process. For
an adiabatic process, this law can be stated as the work done depends only on the system's endpoint
conditions. This law is commonly expressed as Q equals delta U plus W, or heat transferred equals the
change in internal energy plus the work done by the system. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic law of
conservation of energy.
ANSWER: first law of thermodynamics [or the law of conservation of energy until it is read]
When combined with Fourier's Law, this principle yields the heat partial differential equation. Its
analogue for black holes contains a surface gravity over 8 pi term and gives the change in mass. Hess-
law is a consequence of this law, which was developed by James (*) Joule, and it results from the
application of the law of conservation of energy to thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this law that
can stated as "d U equals Q minus W," showing that change in internal energy is equal to heat
transferred minus work done.
ANSWER: first law of thermodynamics [accept law of the conservation of energy before mentioned]
One objection to a formulation of this statement was resolved in part by Evans and Searles's
introduction of the fluctuation theorem; that objection invoked time-reversal symmetry and is
Loschmidt's paradox. That formulation is Boltzmann's H-theorem, while continuum mechanics uses
an inequality named for its most famous formulator and (*) Duhem. A thought experiment concerning
this statement involving a creature that would sort particles based on temperature, Maxwell's Demon.
Rudolf Clausius described this law by saying that no process can solely transfer heat from a lower to higher
temperature body. For 10 points, name this law holding that the entropy of a closed system always
increases.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics
A principle equivalent to this law is formulated in terms of adiabatic accessibility and is called the Principle
of Caratheodory, and the Gibbs paradox attempted to contradict it. Another reformulation of it, the Kelvin-
Planck theorem, states that not all of the heat extracted from a reservoir may be used for work. Maxwell's
demon describes a scenario contrary to this, and the reformulation of Clausius states that heat cannot travel
spontaneously from a colder body to a warmer body. For ten points, name this law, which states that the
entropy of an isolated system increases over time.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics
One generalization of this statement can be used to derive Landauer's principle. One consequence of
this law is that the matrix L in the Onsager reciprocal relations is positive-definite. One extension of
this law states that the ratio of the probability of a pair of time-averaged dissipation functions is
equal to an exponential; that theorem gives the probability of microscopically violating this law and
is called the (*) fluctuation theorem. One method of deriving this statement is to take a closed line integral
of dQ over T for an irreversible process; that gives an inequality named for Clausius. A creature that could
sort fast particles from slow ones would violate this law; that creature is Maxwell's demon. This law limits
the efficiency of the Carnot cycle. For 10 points, name this law which states that for a closed system, the
entropy always increases.
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics
Caratheodory's formulation of this law states that in any neighbourhood of any state S of an
adiabatically isolated system there are states inaccessible from S. Boltzmann's H theorem is a
precursor to this and another statement of this is Clausius's statement, which says is that it is
impossible for heat to move spontaneously from a cold object to a hot one. This law forbids some perpetual
motion machines that are not excluded by the Law of Conservation of Energy, because they would convert
thermal energy into mechanical energy. For ten points, name this physical law which states that the entropy
of the universe is always increasing.
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics
The unitarity of the universe's transition matrix implies this law because this law is a property of
doubly stochastic Markov chains. This law is apparently in conflict with the Poincare recurrence
theorem. One consequence of this law is that the Onsager matrix is positive semi-definite, and this
law's apparent violation of T-symmetry can be resolved using (*) Boltzmann's H-theorem. One version
of this law states that the line integral of dQ over T over a closed path is equal to or less than zero; that
statement is Clausius- inequality. This statement limits the efficiency of the Carnot cycle and is apparently
violated by Maxwell's demon. For 10 points, name this statement that says in a closed system the entropy
must always increase.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics [accept Clausius inequality before mention]
An argument that this law is violated by reversible processes is known as Loschmidt's (LOW-schmidts)
paradox. Boltzmann's H-theorem is generally regarded as a proof of this law. One thought experiment
devised to violate this law has an imaginary creature open a door to separate a gas into hot and cold sides.
That imaginary creature is Maxwell's demon and this law predicts the heat death of the universe. For 10
points, name this law of thermodynamics that states that the entropy of a system always increases.
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics
The Clausius-Duhem inequality recasts this statement in the terms of continuum mechanics. Loschmidt's
paradox is an objection to another formulation of this statement. That formulation states that the derivative
of a function given as the sum over all microstates of that state's probability p times the natural log of p is
always positive and is called Boltzmann's H-theorem. The suggestion that heat does not generally
spontaneously flow from low -to high-temperature objects is the Clausius formation of this statement.
Stating that entropy reaches a maximum at equilibrium, for 10 points, give this statement that an isolated
system's entropy will tend to increase.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics [accept Boltzmann's H-theorem before mention]
The fluctuation theorem quantifies the extent to which this statement is probabilistic. One consequence of
this statement for a cyclic process is that the integral over the whole cycle of the differential absorbed heat
divided by the temperature is zero for a reversible process and negative for an irreversible process. Another
consequence of this statement is that it is impossible to have a process that solely converts heat into work.
One device that initially appears to violate this statement works by selectively allowing high-velocity
particles to accumulate in one side of a container--that is Maxwell's demon. For 10 points, name this
statement whose most famous consequence is that the total entropy of the universe must always increase.
ANSWER: 2nd law of thermodynamics [They need both underlined parts.]
Caratheodory introduced the concept of "adiabatic accessibility" to approach this statement, holding that an
initial adiabatically isolated state would not be able to approach other states in its neighborhood. This
postulate appears to contradict T-symmetry in Loschmidt's paradox, and heat from a reservoir cannot
perfectly be converted into work in the Kelvin-Planck formulation of this statement. This postulate states
that heat cannot flow from a colder body to a warmer body without doing work, according to Clausius's
formulation. Apparently violated by Maxwell's Demon, for 10 points, name this law which states that the
entropy of a closed system always increases.
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics
Its apparent violation of T-symmetry was resolved with the H-theorem developed by Boltzmann. It can be
mathematically stated as the indefinite integral of the reciprocal of temperature with respect to heat is
always positive, while a thought experiment in which it is violated is called Maxwell's Demon. Equivalent
to the statement that not all heat of a system can be converted to useful work, it was first posited by Rudolph
Clausius. For 10 points, identify this law which states that the entropy of the universe always increases.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics
This law can be applied to determine the degree of completion of chemical reactions, and one statement of
this law, which breaks time reversal symmetry, is known as Boltzmann's H-theorem. Another formulation
of this law states that heat cannot convert energy completely into work. A thought experiment proposed to
violate this law allowed one side of a chamber to heat up quickly, and Clausius is credited with the first
formulation of this law, which is violated by Maxwell's demon. For 10 points, name this law which states
that the entropy of the universe is always increasing.
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics
It follows from the H-theorem that T-symmetry does not function because of this idea. It was first
described in relation to cyclical processes as the truth that the integral of the differential of heat divided by
temperature equals the negative "equivalence factor", a certain measure of unusable energy. A thought
experiment that challenges it involves two chambers filled with molecules and is termed Maxwell's demon,
and the "heat death" theory for the end of the universe follows from it. According to Rudolf Clausius,
energy cannot spontaneously flow from a colder body to a warmer one because of, For 10 points, what law
which states that the entropy of a thermodynamic system is always increasing?
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics
Landauer's principle generalizes this statement to information. This statement can be proved by showing
that removing a constraint on a system transiently forces it out of an equilibrium state, then applying
Boltzmann's H theorem. Considering T symmetry with respect to this statement leads to Loschmidt's
paradox. One formulation of this theorem states that the integral of dQ over T is equal to negative N, a
formula due to Clausius. Violated by Maxwell's Demon and used to prove that no engine can be maximally
efficient, for 10 points, name this law that states that the entropy of the universe tends towards a maximum.
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics [prompt on partial answer]
The Jarzynski equality defines the upper bounds of the bounds that this statement mandates. One
challenge to this formulation claimed that it was at odds with time-symmetric dynamics, and is known as
Loschmidt's paradox. That paradox stemmed from one statement of this rule known as Boltzmann's H
Theorem. Clausius's inequality is one statement of this rule, and Kelvin stated it as the impossibility of
converting all heat to work in a cyclic process. A hypothetical being known as Maxwell's demon was
theorized in violation of this rule. For 10 points, name this law that states that the entropy of the universe is
always increasing.
ANSWER: the Second Law of Thermodynamics [prompt on partial answers]
A being able to perceive which particles are moving quickly and which are moving slowly would be able to
open and close a gate in violation of this principle, but such a being would need to expend a great deal of
energy to operate. The integral of dQ over T is set equal to the opposite of E in one formation of this
principle. It cannot be violated by that demon, since the demon would eventually have to erase information,
which irreversibly decreases information entropy. For 10 points, identify this basic thermodynamic
principle, stating that entropy tends to increase.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics [accept slight variations in phrasing; accept Maxwell's demon before "this principle" is read]
This law is apparently contradicted by the Poincare recurrence theorem. The Gibbs paradox deals with
apparent violations of this law. Rudolf Clausius stated this law as saying that heat cannot spontaneously
flow from a cold body to a hotter body. A hypothetical creature which can separate fast molecules and slow
molecules, Maxwell's demon, would violate this law. For 10 points, name this law which says that the
entropy of an insulated system never decreases.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics
One extension of this law states that the efficiency of a Carnot cycle is equal to the difference in
temperature between the hot and cold reservoirs, divided by the temperature of the hot reservoir. One
variant of this law states that one can never achieve 100% efficiency, while another variant states that the
total entropy of the universe is increasing. For 10 points, name this law which most commonly states that
heat never spontaneously flows from a cold source to a hot source.
ANSWER: Second Law of Thermodynamics
The original Thomsen-Berthelot principle, also known as the principle of maximum work, was shown to
violate this law because it failed to incorporate irreversibility. The Kelvin-Planck statement is one
component of this law, and a flaw in Boltzmann's H-theorem concerning this law and time reversal
symmetry is Loschmidt's paradox. A thought experiment in which an imaginary creature guards a trapdoor
between a two-part gas container was proposed to try to violate this law. Clausius stated it as heat cannot
flow from a hot object to a cold one spontaneously. For 10 points, name this law which says that the entropy
of a system increases until it reaches equilibrium.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics
The probability that this law is seemingly violated on small scales is given by the fluctuation theorem,
which was used to explain away Loschmidt's paradox. One method of stating it sets the line integral of dQ
over T around a closed path as equal to or less than zero, which is called Clausius' theorem. This law limits
the maximum possible efficiency for a Carnot (CAR-nough) engine and rules out the possibility of a
perpetual motion machine. For 10 points, name this law which states that the entropy of a closed system
always increases.
ANSWER: second law of thermodynamics [accept obvious equivalents]
The strong form of Planck's formulation of this statement requires a unity quantum mechanical
degeneracy in the ground state. That formulation was based on a consequence of the Nernst-Simon
formulation, which and is a generalization of the Nernst Heat Theorem. This statement says that the
limit of the change in (*) entropy for a transformation approaches zero as temperature approaches zero.
For 10 points, name this statement whose "unattainability" form states that absolute zero cannot be reached
in a finite number of steps.
ANSWER: Third Law of Thermodynamics
Unlike in more classical models, this law is not violated by the Debye model's predictions of the
specific heat of a solid. Similarly, an ideal gas will violate this law for a constant specific heat as
temperature changes. This law arose from observations that the change in enthalpy approaches the
change in the Gibbs free energy for isothermal processes at low temperatures. Due to possibility of
many zero-point energy states in a material, the predicted minimal value of entropy by this law may not be
zero. For 10 points, identify this law that states that the entropy of a system is minimized as temperature
approaches absolute zero.
ANSWER: Third Law of Thermodynamics
Exceptions to this statement occur with systems containing half integer spins which have multiple
degenerate ground states. It can be derived by writing one quantity as the integral of the specific heat
divided by temperature as temperature goes to zero. It can also be derived by using L-Hopital's rule
on the limits of the change in enthalpy divided by temperature and the negative change in Gibbs free
energy divided by temperature. Sometimes called the Nernst theorem, it is often used to calculate the
standard entropy of a substance at any temperature. For 10 points, name this law which states that the
entropy of a perfect crystal at absolute zero is equal to zero.
ANSWER: third law of thermodynamics
An implication of this law is that adiabatic demagnetization cannot be used to bring down a system to
thermal energies below kBT [kay-bee-tee]. One consequence of this law is that expansivity coefficients,
constant volume heat capacity, and the slope of P-T curves on a phase diagram must all approach zero at
certain conditions. Sometimes called the Nernst heat theorem, it implies that at a certain temperature, any
chemical reaction cannot generate entropy. For 10 points, identify this law which states that at absolute
zero, the entropy of a perfect compound is zero, which comes after a law about the increase of entropy for
irreversible processes.
ANSWER: third law of thermodynamics [accept "Nernst heat theorem" until mentioned]
Though it did not concern electromagnetism, this concept was first named by Hans Christian Orsted (URstehd), and a notable example involving quantum entanglement relied on pion decay. One biological
application of this concept employed a folding funnel to overcome Levinthal's protein conformation
paradox, while Freeman Dyson used his namesake sphere to resolve another example in which Earth's
energy reserves are exhausted. Isaac Newton's seminal one placed a cannon on a mountaintop to
demonstrate that gravity caused planetary motion, and Maxwell's demon and Schrodinger's cat are the most
famous ones from thermodynamics and quantum mechanics, respectively. Frequently used by Einstein while
developing relativity theory, name this form of the scientific method in which a hypothesis or principle is
tested only in the mind.
ANSWER: thought experiment [or Gedankenexperiment]
Sound attenuation is inversely proportional to this power of the speed of sound according to Stokes
Law. The Dulong-Petit Law says the molar heat capacity of most substances is this number times R.
The potential of this many dipoles interacting through London dispersion forces is given by an
expression named for Axilrod and Teller. For a molecule, the total number of degrees of freedom is
equal to this number times the number of atoms. In the Standard Model, this is the number of mixing
angles in the (*) CKM matrix, which corresponds to the fact that there are this many generations of quarks.
The dropoff of the electric field of a dipole occurs as this power of the distance. For 10 points, name this
integer equal to the number of quarks that comprise a baryon.
ANSWER: three [accept negative 3, but do NOT accept 1/3]]
Planck's constant is raised to this power in the denominator of the formula for the Rydberg constant. The
power needed to overcome the drag force is proportional to this power of velocity. The electric field of a
dipole falls off as this power of the distance from it. According to Kepler's second law, orbital period
squared is proportional to this power of major axis length. This is the smallest value of n for which the nbody problem is not generally solvable. Jerk is this derivative of position with respect to time. For 10
points, an object's volume is commonly expressed as what exponent of its length units, such a sphere,
whose volume equals four-thirds times radius to this power?
ANSWER: three [or third or cubed]
Dulong and Petit estimated that the heat capacity of most crystalline solids was about this integer
times the gas constant. A monatomic ideal gas has an average kinetic energy of this integer times kT
over two because a spherically symmetric particle has this many (*) degrees of freedom. The electric
field of a dipole falls off like this power of the distance. Jerk is this many time derivatives taken on position.
There are this many generations of quarks and this many quarks in a proton. For 10 points, name this
number which is the number of spatial dimensions in the universe.
ANSWER: three (accept cube; accept negative three)
The square root of quantity this number times R T all over M is defined as the root mean square
speed of a gas. Protons and other baryons are composed of this many quarks. There are this many
generations of leptons and quarks, with each generation having two members. Kepler's law of this
number states that the square of the orbital period is proportional to the orbit's semi-major axis
raised to this power. A space with this many (*) dimensions has time added to it to create a Minkowski
space. For 10 points, name this number of laws of motion put forth by Newton.
ANSWER: three
This is the number of possible arrangements of a pair of identical bosons in a two-level system. A DC
circuit that exhibits damped harmonic oscillation must contain at least this many passive elements. This is
the smallest nonexistent multipole moment. Any gravitating system with at least this many bodies is not
analytically integrable. The electron's charge is this number times the down quark charge. The
thermodynamic law of this number isn-t really a law, and describes the entropy of ideal crystals in a certain
limit. There are this many generations of quarks. For 10 points, give this number that is also the number of
observable spatial dimensions in the universe.
ANSWER: three [accept tripole]
This is the power to which the friction velocity term is raised in the Bangold formula. The meter raised to
this power is the SI unit of the first moment of area. In Planck's law, frequency is taken to this power, while
the squares of the orbital periods of the planets are directly proportional to the semi-major axis of the orbits
taken to this power, by Kepler's third law. This power appears in the denominator of the units for jerk,
where seconds are raised to it. For 10 points, name this power, which yields the volume of a regular
hexahedron when the side length is raised to it.
ANSWER: the third power [or three; or cubed]
The existence of Arnold diffusion in this problem was shown by Zhihong Xia. A theorem first put forth with
respect to this problem states that a conformal one-to-one transformation from an annulus to itself that
advances points on the outer edge positively and inner edge negatively has at least two fixed points. That
theorem was proposed by Poincare and proven by Birkhoff. Karl Sundman found a solution to this problem
in terms of a uniformly convergent infinite series. Jacobi's work on it yielded his namesake integral. One of
the first solutions to this problem is applied to the Trojan asteroids located at the Lagrange points of Jupiter.
It is often considered in a version where one mass is negligible and all masses are moving in the same plane,
which is the circular restricted version. For 10 points, name this unsolved problem first considered by
Newton with respect to the movement of the Moon under the influences of the Sun and Earth.
ANSWER: three-body problem
This system is modeled by the Agekyan-Anosova map, which has a strange attractor at x equals
point five and y equals zero. Jacobi's integral gives a conserved quantity for this system. This
problem can be solved by a slowly-converging series in powers of t to the one-third; that result was
by Sundman. The H two plus ion is a quantum version of this problem, which is often solved using
first-order perturbation theory. One restricted version of this problem displays five equilibrium
points named for (*) Lagrange. This non-integrable problem is approximated by assuming one mass is
much smaller than the others. For 10 points, name this problem about the motion of the requisite number of
massive objects under gravity, most often applied to the Earth, Moon, and Sun.
ANSWER: three-body problem [accept n-body problem]
In a plane-parallel diode, the current density varies as this power of the anode voltage according
to the Child-Langmuir law. In the Sackur-Tetrode equation, this number appears in the exponent
above the internal energy. A spherical polytropic fluid of this index is used to derive the
Chandrasekar limit. This is the maximum spin of a delta baryon. For a body in a circular orbit, the
period is proportional to this power of the (*) radius. In an ideal gas, this value times Boltzmann
constant times temperature, gives the average kinetic energy per particle. The volume varies as this power
of the surface area. For 10 points, give this value, which when multiplied by pi radians gives the
second-smallest positive zero of the cosine function.
ANSWER: 3/2 [or 1.5]
One of the impacts on this quantity by general relativity theory is named after Irwin Shapiro. Two common
forms of the Schrodinger equation are classified by whether or not they are dependent on this quantity, and
reversing this quantity has no impact in electric fields but reverses magnetic fields. In classical mechanics,
impulse is calculated by integrating force with respect to this quantity, and acceleration is the derivative of
velocity with respect to this quantity. In special relativity theory, this quantity is dilated and is sometimes
treated as a "fourth dimension". Name this quantity, the reciprocal of frequency, that is measured by atomic
clocks.
ANSWER: time
This quantity's name is used to describe situations in which there exists a frame of reference such that two
given events could have happened at the same location. The product of two values of this quantity is
subtracted in the Minkowski metric, unlike the spatial components, which are added. The product of
resistance and capacitance has units of this quantity, and RC circuits have a characteristic "constant" for this
quantity over which voltage drops off. Relativity explains this quantity's dilation, which is central to
different aging rates in the twin paradox. For 10 points, identify this quantity of duration, often measured in
seconds or minutes.
ANSWER: time
The integral with respect to this quantity of a Lagrangian yields an action. The principle of detailed balance
requires that dynamics be symmetric under the reversal of this variable, which is conjugate to energy. If a
quantity's value is independent of this variable, the quantity is conserved. The SI unit of this variable is
defined by a device that employs cesium. This quantity experiences "dilation" at relativistic speeds. The
derivative of momentum with respect to this quantity is force. Entropy may explain why the so-called
"arrow" of this phenomenon is unidirectional. For 10 points, name this dimension that is used to describe
which things happen before or after other things.
ANSWER: time
This quantity represents the z-axis in Minkowski space, and the square of it is multiplied by the
square of the speed of light to calculate a certain invariant interval. In circuits, the product of
resistance and capacitance has units of this quantity, its namesake "constant." Its conjugate is total
energy. This quantity is multiplied by the Lorentz factor for objects travelling near the speed of light,
resulting in its namesake (*) "dilation." If acceleration is constant from rest, then net displacement is
proportional to the square of this quantity. The derivative of velocity with respect to it is acceleration. For
ten points, name this quantity measured in seconds.
ANSWER: time
One specific value of this entity is equal to the square root of the ratio of h bar G to c to the fifth. One
version of the uncertainty principle relates energy to this. This is one component of Minkowski space. Its
reversal is combined with charge and parity in an important symmetry. It can dilate in special relativity,
leading to people experiencing it differently in the twin paradox. Velocity is the change in position divided
by the change in this. For 10 points, name this entity measured in minutes and days.
ANSWER: time
This quantity is the only physically-meaningful axis of a Feynman diagram. Detailed balance describes
conditions under which systems are reversible in this variable. All physical laws are believed to be invariant
under charge conjugation, parity inversion, and reversal of this variable. Loosely speaking, virtual particles
are permitted by the form of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle that relates energy to this quantity.
Hyperfine transitions in cesium are used to define the SI unit for this quantity, which undergoes dilation at
relativistic speeds. The change in position per unit change in this is velocity. For 10 points, name this
dimension which is not space.
ANSWER: time
The general Schrodinger equation is described as "dependent" on this quantity. The partial
derivative of magnetic field strength with respect to it equals the curl of the induced electric field,
according to the Maxwell-Faraday law of induction. This quantity also describes a constant in the
exponential term of equations describing (*) LC circuits. Taking the derivative of velocity with respect to
this quantity gives acceleration, and this quantity is unified with space in the theory of relativity. For ten
points, identify this quantity from physics, typically measured in seconds.
ANSWER: time
The invariance of electric fields under this transformation results in the doubly degeneracy of the
energy levels of systems with an odd number of fermions in Kramers theorem. Invariance with
respect to this transformation results in the equality of the ratios between flows and forces in a
thermodynamic system that is out of equilibrium in Onsager's reciprocity. Almost all microscopic
processes are invariant under this transformation but Boltzmann's (*) H-theorem and the second law
of thermodynamics imply macroscopic processes aren-t, leading to Loschmidt's paradox. Laws invariant
under this transformation exhibit T symmetry. For 10 points, each, laws invariant under what operation give
the same results if run backwards in time?
ANSWER: time-reversal
Lloyd showed that if this relationship holds for mixed-multipole gamma transistions, then the phase of the
mixing ratio must be zero or pi. Every eigenvalue of a hamiltonian which is unaffected by this operation in a
system with an odd number of electrons has an even degree of degeneracy according to a theorem of
Kramer. Onsager reciprocity follows directly from invariance with respect to this transformation. In
statistical mechanics, invariance under this type of process is found to underlie the Master Equation and the
principle of detailed balance more generally. Asymmetry under it enters through the molecular chaos
approximation in Boltzmann's H-Theorem. Black holes and the Second Law of Thermodynamics are both
asymmetric under this. For 10 points, name this physical transformation that may be colloquially described
as "watching the tape in reverse."
ANSWER: time-reversal [accept invariance or symmetry at the end until first mention of asymmetry]
For a thermal system, this quantity equals density times specific heat times volume over the heat transfer
constant times surface area. The open-circuit method named after this quantity is used to determine the
corner frequency for complex circuits. In simple circuits, the corner frequency is equal to one over 2 pi times
this quantity. This quantity is equal to the inductance over the resistance in an RL circuit, and it is equal to
resistance times capacitance in an RC circuit. Half-life is equal to this quantity times the natural log of two.
Name this quantity, which equals the amount of time it takes for a system to reach (1 - 1/e) of its final
value, a common constant used in circuit analysis.
ANSWER: time constant [prompt on "tau"]
The value of this operation applied to some flow property is related to integrals involving that flow
property throughout the control volume by the Reynolds transport theorem. Performing a gauge
fixing of the scalar potential is done by subtracting from the scalar potential this operation applied to
the gauge function. This operation is applied to Hamilton's principal function in the Hamilton-Jacobi
equation, and to the (*) conjugate momenta in the Euler-Lagrange equations. This operation is applied to
the action to give the Lagrangian, to the angular momentum to give torque, and to energy to give power. For
10 points, name this operation which is applied to velocity to give acceleration and to position to give
velocity, symbolized d/dt. (dee by dee tee)
ANSWER: time derivative [or "derivative with respect to time," prompt on just "derivative," prompt on "d/dt," BEFORE the words "gauge fixing," prompt on "D/Dt," (capital dee by capital dee tee) accept any of the following answers: material derivative, total derivative, convective derivative, advective derivative, substantive derivative, substantial derivative, Lagrangian derivative, Stokes derivative, particle derivative, hydrodynamic derivative, derivative following the motion, if they buzz after "gauge fixing" with any of those answers, neg them]
For a gauge transformation of the scalar potential, this operation on the gauge function multiplied
by negative one over c is added to the old scalar potential. Hamilton's equations set this operation on
the generalized coordinates equal to a function of the Hamiltonian. This operation is symbolized by
putting a single dot over a function. The curl of the electric field is equal to the negative of this
operation of the magnetic field according to Faraday's Law. Taking this operation on momentum
gives (*) force. This operation takes velocity to acceleration and position to velocity. For 10 points, name
this operation which finds the instantaneous rate of change of a physical quantity.
ANSWER: time derivative [or d/dt (dee-dee-tee); do NOT accept "d/dx" or any letter but "t"]
This effect was first experimentally verified when Ives and Stilwell observed the exact decrease in
frequency predicted by the transverse Doppler effect. This effect is most often illustrated by
considering a traveler who moves at relativistic speeds and returns to find that he is (*) younger than
his twin, a result known as the "twin paradox." It was verified at non-relativistic speeds by placing four
atomic clocks on planes and seeing what time they read compared to a stationary one. For 10 points, name
this effect which, like length contraction, is predicted by special relativity.
ANSWER: time dilation
This effect explains the results of the Rossi-Hall experiment, which measured muons reaching the
surface of the Earth. By using the transverse Doppler Effect, the Ives-Stilwell experiment confirmed
the existence of this effect, which is directly proportional to the Lorentz factor. This effect is the
cause of a paradox in which a (*) twin in a near-light speed rocket ship can leave and return to Earth
younger than a twin who never left Earth. For 10 points, name this consequence of special relativity that
results in clocks "slowing" down at relativistic velocities.
ANSWER: time dilation [prompt on special relativity until it is read]
Rossi and Hall measured the extent to which this phenomenon affected mu mesons observed at the top of a
mountain and at sea level. This concept explains why simultaneity is not absolute for individuals separated
by a long enough distance, and in the transverse Doppler effect, it explains the frequency reductions seen by
both observers. A gedanken-experiment involving this effect concerns the aging of an individual traveling in
space versus one remaining stationary on earth. The twin paradox arises from, for 10 points, what
consequence of special relativity whereby clocks in moving reference frames tick slower than those in
stationary ones?
ANSWER: time dilation [prompt on "special relativity" before mentioned]
This process permits the results of the Rossi-Hall experiment, which measured muons reaching the
surface of the Earth. By using the transverse Doppler Effect, the Ives-Stillwell experiment confirmed the
existence of this effect, which is directly proportional to the Lorentz factor. This effect results in one
paradox where a twin in a rocket ship can return to Earth younger than the twin left on Earth. For 10 points,
name this consequence of Special Relativity that results in clocks "slowing" down at relativistic velocities.
ANSWER: time dilation
The functional of which a system's evolution is a stationary point is equal to this operation applied to
the difference between kinetic and potential energies. The voltage across a capacitor is given the
inverse of its capacitance times this operation applied to the current across it, since charge can be
calculated by applying this operation to current. Applying this operation to the Lagrangian gives the
(*) action, while applying it to power gives energy and applying it to force gives impulse. For 10 points,
name this operation which can be applied to acceleration to get velocity and to velocity to get displacement,
an operation which corresponds to finding the area under a curve of functions of a certain quantity.
ANSWER: time integral [prompt on partial answers]
The Herring criterion for space groups gives conditions on the degeneracies that double under this
operation. It identifies the negative logarithm of phase space volume with Shannon information, and
allowing this process appears to violate the second law of thermodynamics in Loschmidt's paradox. The
violation of it by neutral kaon decay leads to the violation of two closely related symmetries, as observed by
Cronin and Fitch, while applying it to a black hole gives a white hole. For 10 points, name this operation
paired with charge conjugation and parity inversion in the CPT theorem which causes all physical events to
run backwards.
ANSWER: time reversal [accept T and T symmetry before "CPT theorem"]
This body has a dark region called Shangri-la, which is near a bright region called Xanadu. Its north pole
is home to the Ligeia Mare. This body is in a four-to-three orbital resonance with Hyperion. Its Ganesa
Macula is a strong candidate cryovolcano. It has an atmosphere that appears to contain tholins and other
complex organic molecules. This moon has its own weather systems and is covered in an orange smog. It
was discovered by Huygens, who co-names the Cassini-Huygens probe that discovered evidence of
hydrocarbon lakes on it. For 10 points, name this largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
This body features a bright area shaped like a ring called Guabonito and dark area called Aaru,
while the largest crater found on its surface is called Menrva. The Kraken Mare can be found near
the north pole on this body, and it includes a notably large dark area called Shangri-La. (*) Hyperion
is in orbital resonance with this body, which contains a large bright area called Xanadu. Aside from Earth,
it is the only body in the solar system to reflect significant amounts of ELF waves, suggesting a layer of
below-normal freezing point liquid water under a surface full of hydrocarbon lakes. Cryovolcanoes may be
the source of methane on this body, which is obscured by a thick orange atmosphere sixty percent denser
than Earth's. The Huygens probe descended onto it in 2005. For 10 points, name this largest moon of
Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
A. D. Fortes claims that an ammonia-water ocean under the ice on this body is capable of
sustaining life. Features on it include a cryovolcanic dome known as Ganesa Macula, a dark region
known as Shangri-la, and a reflective region known as (*) Xanadu. In 2005, the Huygens probe landed
on the surface of this body. It is the only moon known to have clouds and a planet-like atmosphere. For
10 points, name this second-largest moon in the solar system, the largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
This object's namesake Mare Explorer mission has been proposed to visit its Liegia Mare, which is
mainly made up of ethane and methane. Hotei Regio and Tui Regio are sites on this body, which is
also home to the unusually dark Shangri-La area. The Kraken Lake is on this object, which features
a region with remarkably high albedo called its "Xanadu" area. Because the Miller-Urey
experiment's prebiotic conditions were similar to this body's atmosphere and because it may have (*)
methane lakes with floating ice, this satellite has been the subject of the search for life. This object was the
destination of the Huygens probe, and this is the only moon with a dense atmosphere. For 10 points, name
this largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
One of the dark features on the surface of this object is Ontario Lacus [LAH-koos], and some of its bright
locations are Dilmun, Adiri, and Xanadu. The dark objects are believed to be hydrocarbon lakes, as
opposed to the water ice which makes up much of this object. Its Xanadu region is close to where the
Huygens [HOY-gens] probe landed in 2005. After our moon and the Galilean [gal-uh-LAY-un] moons, this
was the first moon discovered, and this has the densest atmosphere of all satellites in our solar system.
Name this large moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
This body contains craters such as Menrva, Sinlap, and Guabonito. University of Idaho professor Jason
Barnes has proposed a mission to study this body called AVIATR. This celestial body contains the
hydrocarbon lake Ontario Lacus. It is not Triton, but this celestial body has massive tholin deposits. This
body's Sotra Patera is believed to be a cryovolcano. This body has seasonal weather patterns, and rain made
of methane was observed by the Huygens probe. For ten points, name this foggy moon, the largest of Saturn
and the second largest in the solar system.
ANSWER: Titan (accept Saturn VI)
A ring of impact features on this body is named for Gaubatino. Kraken Mare is this body's largest
known body of water. Although not Venus, this body's Ganesa Macula resemble pancake domes, and
was originally thought to be cryovolcanic. Xanadu is a large reflective region on the surface of this
celestial body, and Xanadu shares a border with (*) Shangri-la on it. A mission partially named for
Huygens, this body's discoverer, was sent to it in 2005, and found that it resembled a primordial earth. This
body is in close proximity to Norse, Gallic and Inuit groups of similar bodies, and Giovanni Cassini names
prominent features of this satellite's largest neighbor; those features are rings. For 10 points, name this
largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
Liquid areas on this body include Ontario Lacus and Kraken Mare, and it includes such large regions as
Xanadu and Shangri-la. Ammonia-water mixing occurs beneath its surface, and the Ganesa Macula is one of
this satellite's cryovolcanic domes. With an atmosphere consisting primarily of nitrogen, this body was
observed by the Cassini and Huygens probes, as well as the earlier Voyager missions. This body is the only
planetary moon with its own atmosphere. For 10 points, name this largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
A highly reflective region on this moon is paired with a dark region; those regions are called Xanadu and
Shangri-la, the latter of which was the site of a probe landing. Precipitation on this moon is driven by the
methane cycle, which takes place in its majority-nitrogen atmosphere, the only one of its kind to be found
on a satellite. The Cassini-Huygens mission discovered hydrocarbon lakes and rivers on the surface of this
moon. For 10 points, name this largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
One of the few impact craters on this object is named Guabonito and located in its Shangri-la region near
Xanadu. It also contains Kraken Mare, which is believed to be the largest of several bodies of liquid. By
observing shifts in its crust, scientists now believe that this object contains an underground ocean possibly
including water, which may be something that this has in common with some moons of Jupiter. Its
atmosphere consists primarily of nitrogen with a little methane, and it has the densest atmosphere of all
satellites in the solar system. Occasionally passing near the Cassini spacecraft, name this largest moon of
Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
Recent observations of this body have revealed a bright West Virginia-sized spot on its surface just
southeast of the Xanadu region. The only noble gas found on it is argon-40, leading to speculation that its
primary distinguishing feature is generated by outgassing from the interior. Its surface temperature and
atmospheric pressure were first measured by Voyager I, though the most detailed information about this
satellite comes from the Huygens probe, which landed on its surface in 2005 and discovered lakes of liquid
hydrocarbons near its polar regions. The only satellite in the solar system with clouds and a dense
atmosphere, FTP, identify this second largest moon in the solar system and the largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
In June 2013, scientists found PAHs in this body's atmosphere. The Ligeia and Kraken Mares are found on
this body, which undergoes a sort of "anti-greenhouse effect" due to the large concentration of organic
molecules. This object, which is in resonance with Hyperion, has an orange smog caused by the breakup of
methane in its atmosphere. Methane is also present in this moon's lakes. The Huygens portion of the
Cassini-Huygens mission explored this moon. For 10 points, name this moon, the second largest in the solar
system and the largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
In 2012, a circular feature was discovered on this body and nicknamed a "Hot Cross Bun" by NASA
for the similarity of its cracks to those formed by uplift from baking. One feature on this body is a
reflective region known as Xanadu, while Ganesa Macula and Sotra Facula may be sites of (*)
cryovolcanism. The reflection of extremely low frequency radio waves from it may be an indication of an
interior sea. This moon is home to Ontario Lacas, discovered to be a hydrocarbon lake by the CassiniHuygens mission. An indicator of life on this body is the presence of higher concentrations of hydrogen in
this body's upper atmosphere than in its lower atmosphere. For 10 points, name this only satellite with a
dense atmosphere, the largest moon of Saturn.
ANSWER: Titan
A quasi-periodic relaxation in these devices is known as an Edge-Localized Mode and was first
discovered in the ASDEX. These devices are specified by a set of three parameters; a ratio of
pressures beta, a product of collision frequency and transit time v-star, and a ratio of radii rho-star.
Heat is carried to the walls of these devices by free neutrons, and unlike z-pinches these devices are
closed. Radio-frequency or neutral beam injection heating are used in these devices, some of which include
the Alcator c-Mod and the future ITER. Originally concieved by Tamm and Sakharov, they use the Lorentz
effect via a toroidal magnetic field. For 10 points, name these devices used to contain plasmas, important in
fusion research.
ANSWER: Tokamak
The equation governing these systems sets the minor-radius laplacian of psi equal to the sum of terms
containing the derivative of pressure in terms of psi minus a term containing the poloidal current times its
derivative; that equation is the Grad-Shafranov equation. One effect in these objects is a shift of the center
of density away from the geometric center, a shift likewise named for Shafranov. Confinement in these
devices occurs due to a driven torodial plasma current; these devices are thus similar to stellerators, which
have additional helical coils. The largest of them currently in operation is JET, which will be replaced by
ITER when the latter is complete. For 10 points, name these toroidal magnetic confinement devices for hot
plasmas which are candidates as nuclear fusion reactors.
ANSWER: tokamaks [accept spheromaks before "JET"; prompt on fusion reactors; or plasma devices]
The change in magnetization in response to this quantity produced by the effective field is given by
the Landau-Lifshitz equation. Slonczewski names one type of this quantity, which comes from an
effect known as the spin-transfer type. When this quantity is zero, Poinsot's construction gives a
solution to (*) Euler's equations. In a non-rotating reference frame, Euler's equations set this proportional
to the moment of inertia. If the angular speed is constant, a cone will be traced out in the precession this
quantity induces. Power is given by the dot product of angular velocity with this quantity. This quantity is
the time-derivative of angular momentum, and equals force cross lever arm. For 10 points, name this
rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
The spin-transfer form of this phenomenon is the namesake of a form of magnetic RAM currently in
development. The Trouton-Noble experiment attempted to measure this phenomenon for a parallel-plate
capacitor in the presence of a luminiferous aether. A system free of this phenomenon makes the right hand
side of Euler's equations equal zero. In an electric field, it is equal to the dipole moment crossed with(*)
field strength. A source of precession, this phenomenon, symbolized tau, it is calculated as the cross product
of force and length of the lever arm. Equal to the time derivative of angular momentum, for ten points, name
this rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
Gyroscopic precession may be induced by or free of this physical quantity, which is dotted with
angular velocity in one expression for power. It is measured in units equivalent to joules but named
differently, as newton-meters. This quantity is calculated as (*) radius cross force, with its direction
found using the right-hand rule. For 10 points, identify this quantity which describes the tendency of a a
force to cause rotation about a fixed axis.
ANSWER: torque (accept moment of force or couple; prompt on moment)
The motion of a rigid body when this quantity is zero can be visualized by the use of Poinsot's ellipsoid.
For a magnetic dipole, this quantity is given by the cross product of the dipole with the magnetic field. This
quantity is defined as the time derivative of the angular momentum or as the cross product of the
displacement and force vectors, and it can also be obtained from the product of the moment of inertia and
the angular acceleration. For 10 points, identify this quantity, the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
This quantity is the source term in the mechanical Liouville equation, a generalization of Euler's equation of
motion to non-rigid bodies. A mechanical couple produces these but not their analogues. A body
experiences mechanical precession when the body's angular velocity is perpendicular to this quantity on the
body. For 10 points, name this vector quantity, the derivative of angular momentum, which, given constant
moment of inertia, causes angular acceleration and which is equivalent to the cross product of position and
force, making it the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
The direction of this quantity can be determined by pointing the fingers in the direction of the force using
the right hand rule. Taking the integral of this quantity between two angular positions gives the work while
taking the cross product of this quantity with angular velocity gives work. The Greek tau is typically used
for this quantity, equal to the cross product of force and the displacement. For 10 points, name this
rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
This quantity equals the magnetic dipole [DIE-pole] moment crossed with the magnetic field or the electric
dipole moment crossed with the electric field, so it equals zero when the moments and fields align with each
other. Precession [pree-SESH-un] is often classified based on whether or not this is present; it is present in
the gyroscopic [JAI-roe-scop-ic] type and is generally supplied by gravity. Equal to the rate of change of
angular momentum, this quantity is often calculated using displacement cross force, or as moment of inertia
time angular acceleration. Name this quantity which is the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
In electric fields, this quantity is the cross product of the electric dipole moment and the field. In
gyroscopes, this quantity produces a change in "L" that causes precession. For an orbiting body, this vector
quantity always points perpendicular to the plane of the orbit. This quantity is equal to the time derivative
of angular momentum. For 10 points, name this cross product of force and displacement, the angular
analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
An equation for determining the net external value of this phenomenon rewrites Newton's Second Law as
being equal to I times alpha. By facing fingers in the direction of an applied force, the right hand rule can
be used to have the thumb point in the direction of this force. This force is equal to r F times the sine of
theta, where theta is the angle at which the force is being applied around a pivot. For 10 points, name this
physics phenomenon defined as the tendency for an applied force to cause an object to rotate.
ANSWER: torque [or moment of force; or moment of a force]
It is not the luminiferous ether, but in the Trouton Noble experiment, a zero measure for this quantity
caused a null result for changes in the orientation of a parallel-plate capacitor. In a type of motion, the
absence of this phenomenon causes the right-hand-sides of the Euler angles to become zero, and it is given
by the magnetic moment cross the b-field for a current loop. When the angle between the spinning and
vertical axis remains constant during rotation, the precessing motion is said to be induced to this
phenomenon. This vector quantity is equal to the rate of change of angular momentum. For 10 points,
identify this quantity which describes the force required to push open a door at various distances from the
hinges.
ANSWER: Torque
This quantity is the time derivative of angular velocity. In rotational equilibrium, this quantity
sums to zero. It is equal to the angular acceleration multiplied by the moment of inertia, which is the
rotational analog of mass. Calculating this quantity makes notable use of the (*) right-hand rule, since
it is the cross-product of the position vector and force vector. For 10 points, identify this rotational analog
of force, which causes a rotational acceleration of a body about an axis.
ANSWER: torque
A magnetometer named for this quantity is used to measure magnetic anisotropy. For an electric dipole
in an electric field, this quantity can be calculated as the product of electric field, charge, displacement, and
sine of theta. That formula is equivalent to the cross product of electric dipole moment and electric field.
Integrating this quantity with respect to angular displacement calculates its associated work. Although it is
not force, this quantity must total zero at any given point in a physical system for the system to be in
equilibrium. This quantity is defined as the cross product of the position vector and force. For 10 points,
name this rotational analogue of force that describes twisting.
ANSWER: torque
Gyroscopic precession is also called this induced precession, and Poinsot's ellipsoid models another
kind of precession called this-free. Deformation due to this creates a shearing stress and is called
torsion. Equal to the product of the moment of inertia and the angular acceleration, it is also the time
derivative of the angular momentum. For 10 points, identify this pseudo-vector quantity proportional to
the cross product of the force applied and the lever arm, a rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
The Slonczewski form of one type of this quantity is summed with three others to give the magnetization of
a ferromagnet's free layer in the Landau-Lifshitz equation. This quantity is the time derivative of another
physical quantity whose quantum mechanical form is added using Clebsch-Gordon coefficients. One form
of this quantity is the cross product of dipole moment and applied field, and this quantity appears alone on
one side of Euler's equations. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to lever arm cross force, the time
derivative of angular momentum and the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
A water brake dynamometer (dai-nuh-MOM-i-ter) measures power output by changes in this quantity in an
engine, and the components of this quantity appear on one side of the Euler (OY-lur) equations for rigid
bodies. Epicylic (ep-uh-SAI-klik) gearing is used to multiply this quantity, and a couple produces a net
value of this quantity sometimes synonymous with moment of force. This is equal to the derivative of
angular momentum with respect to time and can also be calculated as moment of inertia times angular
acceleration. Equal to the lever arm length times the perpendicular component of force, name this quantity
which causes objects to spin about an axis, the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque [accept moment of force before it is mentioned]
One of these is given by the gyromagnetic ratio times the angular momentum vector crossed with the
magnetic field; that form of this phenomenon can cause the precession of the magnetic moment at the
Larmor frequency. A set of "planetary" gears, beginning with a "sun" gear, comprise a device that acts as a
"multiplier" of this quantity. When two applied force vectors oppose one another, they form a couple and
their moment is known as this term. Power is the dot product of angular velocity at this quantity A second
condition of static equilibrium is that in addition to force, the sum of these terms must be zero. This term is
computed by taking the cross product of lever arm and force. For 10 points, identify this rotational analog
of force.
ANSWER: torque [accept moment until mentioned]
For an Euler-Bernoulli beam, this quantity is proportional to Young's modulus times the 2nd derivative of
displacement with respect to position. The 3 components of this quantity can be determined in terms of the
3 components of angular velocity by the Euler equations. For a dipole in an electric field, this quantity is
equal to the dipole moment crossed with the field. Precession occurs when this quantity is perpendicular to
the angular momentum vector. When calculating this quantity, it is useful to find the lever arm. Newton's
Second Law sets it equal to the product of the moment of inertia and angular acceleration. For 10 points,
name this quantity defined as R cross F, the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
For an electric dipole, this quantity can be calculated as the cross product of its dipole moment and the
electric field. Two forces which cause a net force of zero but a nonzero value for this quantity are known as
a couple. The direction of this quantity can be determined with the right hand rule, and it is the time
derivative of angular momentum. It is computed as the cross product of lever arm and force, or alternatively
as the product of angular acceleration and moment of inertia. For 10 points, name this rotational analogue of
force.
ANSWER: Torque [accept Moment of Force; do not accept "Moment of Inertia"]
One form of this quantity is represented as the cross product of lambda times magnetization and the
derivative of magnetization in the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation. For an electric dipole, this quantity
with a "spin-transfer" variety is equal to the cross product of the dipole moment and the electric field, while
for a rigid body, this quantity can be maximized by increasing the distance from the pivot point or
increasing the tangential component of force. With units of newton-meters, it is the time derivative of
angular momentum. For 10 points, name this quantity, the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque [or moment]
For a current loop, this quantity is equal to the current times the area cross magnetic field, and
gyroscopic precession is induced by this phenomenon. Two forces that result in no net force but a
nonzero value for this quantity are known as a couple, while both this quantity and force must be
zero at equilibrium. The time derivative of angular momentum, it is found by taking the cross
product of lever arm and (*) force or by multiplying moment of inertia and angular acceleration. For 10
points, name this rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
This quantity is equal to the time derivative of the cross product of the vector from the pivot to where the
force is applied and the vector of the applied force. Like energy and work, this quantity can be expressed as
a product of a force unit and a length unit. Equal to the moment of inertia times the angular acceleration,
name this rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
A converter named for this concept is in cars with automatic transmissions instead of a clutch,
allowing drivers to use the brakes without harming the car. To find this quantity on a loop of wire,
start with the product of current times vector area, and cross that with the external magnetic field.
Work can be found by integrating this quantity with respect to angle, and this quantity is equal to
the time derivative of angular momentum. Name this quantity equal to both moment of inertia times
angular acceleration and to position vector cross force, the rotational analogue of force.
ANSWER: torque
When this quantity is absent, Poinsot's construction represents one phenomenon that usually requires it to be
present, while the type of that phenomenon "induced" by this quantity is also called the "gyroscopic" kind.
The one exerted by the sun and moon on the earth results in the twenty-six thousand year precession of the
earth's axis of rotation, and this quantity is the time derivative of angular momentum. FTP, identify this
quantity, equal to the cross product of lever arm and force applied, which refers to the effect that an action
has in rotating a body around some axis.
ANSWER: Torque [or Moment of Force]
For a current-carrying coil of wire, this quantity is equal to the product of magnetic field, number of coils,
current, area, and sine of theta, which is equivalent to the cross product of magnetic dipole moment and
magnetic field. Work associated with rotation is the integral of this quantity with respect to angular
displacement, and although it is not energy, it is measured in Newton-meters. Defined as the cross product
of the position vector and force, For 10 points, name this action on a body which produces twisting.
ANSWER: Torque
This quantity's dot product with angular velocity equals power. A "couple" is created when a system
has a nonzero value for this quantity but no net force. Though it's not energy, it can be expressed in
units of Newton-meters, and it is equal to the cross product of position and (*) force. A set of
"planetary" gears, beginning with a "sun" gear, comprise a device that acts as a "multiplier" of this quantity.
For 10 points, name this rotational analogue of force, represented by the letter tau.
ANSWER: Torque [accept moment]
Free precession results when this quantity is constant, and power is the cross product of this quantity and
angular velocity. The cross product of the electric dipole moment with the electric field gives this quantity,
which is also the time derivative of angular acceleration. This quantity is defined as moment of inertia times
angular acceleration, and is the rotational analogue of force. For 10 points, name this quant represented by
the letter tau, which is equivalent to force times distance.
ANSWER: torque
This quantity is equal to the cross product of dipole moment and electric field, and an epicyclic mechanism
including "sun" and "planet" gears "multiply" it. Varignon proved that this is additive when applied at the
same point. Power is the scalar product of this quantity and omega, or angular velocity. Work is the integral
of this quantity with respect to theta, and a lever in rotational equilibrium has a net value of zero for this
quantity. This quantity can be measured by newton-meters or joules per radian, and is denoted by the letter
tau. For 10 points, name this time derivative of angular momentum and rotational analogue of force, which
is the cross product of lever arm and force.
ANSWER: torque [also accept moment]
In mechanics, Varignon's theorem deals with this quantity. When a system of forces has a nonzero value
for this quantity but no resulting force, it is called a "couple." This quantity can be measured in units of
newton metres or joules per radian. It can be defined as the cross product of displacement and force, or the
time derivative of angular momentum. It is also known as "moment." For 10 points, name this measure of
how much a force acting on an object causes it to rotate.
ANSWER: torque [or moment before it is read]
This person studied the shape Gabriel's horn, which is therefore sometimes called this person's
"trumpet". The law named for this person, which is a specific case of Bernoulli's principle, states that
the square root of the quantity twice little g times height from the top equals the speed of a fluid
leaving a container. This scientist, who worked with Galileo, found that a column of mercury does
not completely empty when inverted and that the height of the remaining mercury column depends
on weather conditions. The unit named for this person is approximately equal to a millimeter of
mercury. Name this inventor of the barometer.
ANSWER: Evangelista Torricelli [tor-rih-CHEL-lee] [do not accept "torr"]
One form of this effect sees an evanescent wave transfer to a separate medium, followed by a flow of
energy across the boundary. That form, similar to quantum tunneling, is known as the "frustrated"
form of this phenomenon. It occurs when light exceeds the angle given as "theta equals the inverse
sine of the ratio of the smaller index of refraction to the larger index of refraction." For 10 points,
name this phenomenon that occurs when the angle of incidence for light (*) exceeds the critical angle, a
type of reflection used in fiber optics.
ANSWER: total internal reflection [prompt on partial answer; award 15 points for a post-FTP buzz within power mark]
This phenomenon causes circularly-polarized and linearly-polarized waves to undergo a small phase
shift perpendicular to the direction of propagation in the Imbert-Fedorov and Goos-Hanchen effects,
respectively. This effect creates evanescent surface waves which can traverse a sufficiently small gap,
causing the frustrated form of this effect. This effect is predicted by the (*) Fresnel equations, as the
transmission coefficients decrease as the incidence angle increases. It is critical to the operation of fiber
optics and occurs at incidence angles above the critical angle. For 10 points, identify this effect in which
light is prevented from entering a medium with a lower index of refraction.
ANSWER: total internal reflection [prompt on partial answers]
The Imbert-Fedorov effect sees a transverse shift occur during this process, and it produces a lateral
shift in the Goos-Hanchen effect. Its namesake type of fluorescence microscopy makes use of its
associated evanescent wave. The evanescent wave can be picked up if a piece of material is placed
close by, giving rise to its (*) "frustrated" form. This phenomenon is often used in polarizing prisms, and it
gives rise to the waveguide properties of fiber optics. Occurring above a critical angle given by Snell's law,
for 10 points, name this phenomenon in which none of the light incident on a boundary refracts, instead
remaining in the transmitting medium.
ANSWER: total internal reflection or TIR
This magnitude of the phase shift produced by this effect depends on whether the input is in a TE or a TM
mode. That phase shift produced by this effect can used to produce a circularly polarized wave without the
use of a birefringent material by the Fresnel rhomb. This effect produces an exponentially decaying electric
field which can cause energy transfer between two media via optical tunneling as an evanescent wave is
converted to a propagating wave. This effect occurs when the incident angle is greater than or equal to the
inverse sine of the ratio of the smaller to the larger index of refraction. Optical fibers and waveguides use
this effect to transmit information over large distances. For 10 points, name this effect that occurs when
light incident upon an interface beyond the critical angle has zero transmission across the interface.
ANSWER: total internal reflection or TIR [prompt on partial answers]
The leaky variety of these devices are used to supply loads which require negative resistance or which
require periodic short circuiting. A dot is placed at the two positive ends of the circuit diagram for this
device. The ideal equation for this device is derived from the power equation, and states V-sub's over Vsub-p equals N-sub's over N-sub-p. In that equation, N-sub's and N-sub-p are the numbers of coils in this
device's secondary and primary inductors, which allows an alternating current to be stepped up or stepped
down. For 10 points, name these devices that change the voltage of an electric current and are often seen
connected to utility poles.
ANSWER: transformers
The impacts of these devices can be measured through open-circuit and short-circuit testing. The
ferromagnetic materials inside these devices produce a sound caused by magneto-striction. These
devices are used because the requirements for transmitting electricity efficiently are different from
the requirements for using electricity efficiently. The advent of these devices enabled AC to become
more popular than DC. Name these devices with primary and secondary windings, which are used
to "step up" or "step down" voltage.
ANSWER: transformers
Instances of these devices with stacked lamination uses an alternate method of E and I laminations. Large
ones can use oil for insulation. Scott-t ones can handle two to three phase connections. Their components
can be in delta or wye configurations. The cores of these devices can be three, four, or five limbed. Electric
audio amplifiers, particularly those in a class b, use center tapped ones on the input and the output. The
ratio of voltages associated with one of these devices is proportional to the ratio of turns. They can be used
to step up or down voltage. For 10 points, name these devices that transfer electrical energy from one AC
circuit to another using induction.
ANSWER: transformer
A simple inverter consists of one of these components with a DC input in one part. The parameters
of one of these devices are determined using the open-circuit and short-circuit tests. These devices'
energy losses are sub-divided into copper losses and iron losses. The root-mean-square output of
these devices equals approximately 4.44 times the frequency times area times magnetic field times N.
An example of the resonant kind of these devices is the (*) Tesla coil. The equation governing these
components sets the ratio of the number of turns in the two coils equal to the ratio of the voltages in the
winding. For 10 points, name these alternating circuit components containing a pair of inductively-coupled
coils that steps down or steps up an input voltage.
ANSWER: transformer
One combination of two of these devices intended to mitigate the Miller effect is a cascode amplifier,
and Darlington pairs behave like single ones with approximately the product of the respective
current gains. The most common current type of these devices, often employed in the (*) CMOS
configuration on integrated circuits, exploits the ability of a voltage to induce a conducting channel
elsewhere via field effects. The bipolar junction type of these devices gradually has given way to
MOSFETs. For 10 points, name these three-terminal semiconductor devices, which amplify and switch
electronic signals.
ANSWER: transistors
Frank Wanlass of Fairchild Semiconductors developed a still-common low-power type of these
devices. That complementary variety combines two earlier types named for channels, in which the
quantum Hall effect was first observed. Those "metal-oxide semiconductor" types contrast with the
bipolar junction type. Current terminology for the sections of this component includes source, drain, and
gate, replacing the still-used terms of collector, emitter, and base. For 10 points, name this component
ubiquitous in integrated circuits, the basis for logic gates.
ANSWER: transistors [accept Metal-Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect transistors or MOSFETs before "bipolar junction" is read]
An experiment conducted by Joseph Becker and John Shive confirmed that the "sandwich" type of this
device would function. A tape recorder manufacturing company begun by Akio Morita and Masaru Ibuka
became famous for introducing a pocket-sized apparatus based on this device. The first type of this device
to be created used a small strip of gold foil spread over one vertex of a plastic triangle and carefully cut at
that vertex. That was the point-contact type of this device, which was made by John Bardeen and Walter
Brattain, who worked under William Shockley at Bell Labs. For 10 points, identify this device that was
used in a namesake type of radio.
ANSWER: transistor
The first patent for one was filed by Julius Edgar Lilienfeld in 1925. When placed in a configuration with
diodes and a capacitor, several of these constitute an operational amplifier. In 1947, William Shockley,
John Bardeen and Walter Brattain succeeded in building the first practical point-contact one at Bell Labs.
FTP, name this three terminal, solid state semiconductor device commonly used to amplify or switch
electronic signals.
ANSWER: transistor
One type of these devices is described by the Ebers-Moll model, while the Early effect describes the
variation in the width of the base of one of these. The Quantum Hall effect was first observed in one of
these devices. The size and shape of the conductive channel determines the flow through the field-effect
type of this device, subtypes of which include JFETs and MOSFETs. A more common modern variety is the
bipolar junction type, which comes in n-p-n and p-n-p types and has three pins labeled emitter, collector,
and base. For 10 points, name this electronic component used to amplify and switch currents, important in
logic gates in modern computing equipment.
ANSWER: transistors
One of the earliest of these devices, co-created by Walter Brattain, was applied to a device that had
the advantage of not needing to warm up, while a mechanism for producing many of these at once
was developed by Jack Kilby. During the so-called "Miracle Month" at Bell Labs, the (+) first
point-contact one of these devices was created by a team led by future Nobel Prize winner William
Shockley. The "avalanche" type of these devices have a very small rise and fall time, while another
type of these devices consists of a collector, base and emitter and is known as the Junction variety. (*)
Texas Instruments produced the first one of these devices made from silicon, and these devices made from
doped semiconductors largely replaced vacuum tubes. For 10 points, identify this core component of
electronics, often used in namesake radios.
ANSWER: Transistor
The most used type of this device can operate in the cut-off, triode or saturation region, depending on
Vgs and Vds (V G S and V D S). Another type of this device comes in pnp and npn varieties and has three
contacts: a collector, base, and emitter. Field-effect and bipolar junction are types of these devices. They
are smaller than vacuum tubes and are found in computer microprocessors and namesake radios. For 10
points, name these circuit components that amplify and switch electronic signals.
ANSWER: transistors
The Gummel-Poon model describes one of these devices that is subject to the Early effect. Two of these
objects can be used to create a Darlington pair, and an "ion sensitive" variety can measure ion
concentrations in solution. Electric field controls the drainage voltage in field effect types of these devices,
which include MOSFETs, and bipolar types of them come in PNP and NPN types. These electrical
components were introduced by a team from Bell Labs and are useful in amplifying signals. For 10 points,
name these circuit components that replaced vacuum tubes in computers and are useful as switches.
ANSWER: Transistors
Darlington pairs consist of two of these devices, which are described by the Ebers-Moll model. The first
one ever created was of the point-contact variety, made by Brattain, Shockley, and Bardeen. These devices
either have base, emitter, and collector pins, or gate, source and drain pins. The field-effect type have
mostly replaced the bipolar junction type of these devices, which are made of sandwiched p and n type
semiconductors. The density of these devices on computer chips doubles every 18-24 months, according to
Moore's law. For 10 points, name these devices used as amplifiers and switches.
ANSWER: transistors [accept bipolar junction transistors until "point-contact" is read]
They come in depletion and enhancement varieties, and when saturated, they can function as constantcurrent sources. The magnetically-sensitive type depends on electron spin properties and is being used in
the development of MRAM. One type has one p-n linkage between the conducting channel and gate, while
another type has two in series. Those two forms, the junction gate and bipolar junction ones, are used for
more traditional applications. For 10 points, name this semiconductor device that is currently used as
switches or amplifiers whose counts on integrated circuits follow Moore's law.
ANSWER: field-effect transistors
Last year, Finnish and Italian physicists created a "heat" version of one of these, allowing voltage to control
heat flow at low levels. MESFET types are well suited for microwave applications such as cellular
networks, while decreases in their size have successfully proven Moore's Law. Point-contact devices from
Brattain and Bardeen combined with work on junctions by William Shockley to produce the first of these
devices, which earned the three the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics. FTP, name this circuit component with a
base, a collector and an emitter, the main component of most electronic devices.
ANSWER: Transistor
The Early effect causes an increase in collector current as reverse bias voltage increases in the bipolar
junction variety of these components. These components take advantage of the behavior of electrons at the
interface between two semiconductor layers, known as a p-n junction, to amplify and control electrical
signals. Moore's Law states that the number of these components on an integrated circuit doubles every
eighteen to twenty-four months. Core components of computer microprocessors, for 10 points, name these
electrical devices whose small sizes allow them to replace vacuum tubes as a primary component of
electronic circuits.
ANSWER: transistors
During the invention of this device, the so-called "traitorous eight" founded Fairchild. John Pierce coined
the name of this invention, which began as strips of gold attached to a plastic triangle called the "pointcontact" type. This device, which replaced Lee De Forest's triode tube, was easier to manufacture in the
"bipolar junction" form than the "field effect" form. Every 18 months, the number of these which can fit on
an IC doubles, according to Moore's Law. Bell Labs scientists Brattain, Bardeen, and Shockley won the
1956 Nobel for inventing this device. For 10 points, name these semiconductor-containing devices used as
amplifiers and switches.
ANSWER: transistors
Shengdong Li operated the single-walled nanotube type at microwave frequencies for the first time. The
behavior of one type of them can be modeled by the Ebers-Moll equation and the Miller effect can be
reduced by using their cascode form. Two of these are found in a type named for Darlington and Moore's
law states that their density on microprocessors would double every two years. Used to construct logic
gates, they are divided into bipolar and field effect types. For 10 points, name this device used for
amplification and/or switching of electric current.
ANSWER: transistors
The first one of these objects contained a triangular piece of plastic held in place by a spring and coated in
part in gold foil. Containing an emitter and a collector, it was the point-contact type. Later examples of
these are the field-effect and bipolar junction types. Developed by Walter Brattain, John Bardeen, and
William Shockley, these have at least three terminals and first became commercially successful in radios.
Name these doped semiconductor devices that have become the building blocks of computer integrated
circuits.
ANSWER: transistors
They're not capacitors, but these devices were first patented by Julius Lilienfeld. The CDC 1604,
developed by Seymour Cray, was the first commercial computer to use them. One of them using gold
point-contacts on a germanium crystal was invented at Bell Labs. Discrete ones have generally been phased
out in favor of integrated circuits. For 10 points, name this semiconductor device which revolutionized
modern electronics, as seen in early namesake radios.
ANSWER: transistors [or field-effect transistors; or point-contact transistors; or bipolar junction transistors]
One model of these devices that reduces to the Ebers-Moll model is the Gummel-Poon model. When the
current gain of two of these devices equals the product of the component gains, these devices create a
Darlington Pair. The gradual channel approximation is valid for long channel types of the field-effect
versions of these devices. One type of these devices may be classified as PNP or NPN, and they possess
base, collector, and emitter terminals. Every two years, the number of these devices on an integrated circuit
doubles according to Moore's Law. For 10 points, "bipolar junction" is a type of what semiconductor
electrical components that switch or amplify signals?
ANSWER: transistors
Nomoto showed that the rate of this process is much faster than originally thought by approximating
the solution to a nonresonant quantum many-body problem. The energy generation equation for this
reaction is a power law equation centered on 100 million Kelvin and dependent on density squared
and temperature to the 41st.This reaction was predicted based on a 7.7 M-E-V resonance with an
excited state of the (*) final product. Hoyle stated that this reaction must exist to explain the abundance of
atoms heavier than carbon. The instability of Beryllium-8 requires that the final namesake participant in this
reaction must collide immediately after the first collision, creating a third power dependence on reactant
concentration. It causes the helium flash in lower mass giant stars. For 10 points, name this fusion reaction
which produces carbon from three helium nuclei.
ANSWER: triple alpha process [accept Salpeter process; prompt on anything involving the word "fusion" or "nuclear fusion" until mention]
High plains on this planet are dotted with pits like the Leviathan Patera, indicating huge flows of
possibly ammonia-based lava. This topography, combined with geologic diapir activity, casues the
"canteloupe" appearance of this body, which may actually have atmospheric winds as evidence by
the streaked pattern of geyser residue. It cannot have arisen out of the same solar nebula that
yielded the body it orbits, evidence by its retrograde rotation, leading most astronomers to conclude that
this moon is a capture Kuiper Belt object. Cryovolcanism runs rampant on, for 10 points each, what coldest
body in the solar system, the largest moon of Neptune?
ANSWER: Triton
One ridge feature on this body is the Slidr Sulci and a unique class of dark features here are guttae. Its
largest impact crater is Mazomba. This moon has a unique surface feature called "cantaloupe terrain",
which resembles a melon skin. Due to tidal heating, this moon is believed to have spent a billion years in a
liquid state. This moon's gravity is believed to cause disruption in the orbit of its neighbor, Nereid. Frozen
nitrogen is emitted by geysers on this moon, the most notable example of ice volcanoes. Because of its
retrograde orbit, this moon is believed to have been captured from the Kuiper Belt. For 10 points, name this
largest moon of Neptune.
ANSWER: Triton
A 2 second lag in the stellar-occultation light curve characteristic of this body shows asymmetrical
mass distribution possibly caused by winds. It was described to possess a "cantaloupe" terrain by its
discoverer William Lassell, and its high density and retrograde motion suggest that it is a captured
Kuiper Belt object. It is notable for exhibiting cryovolcanism, and it is the coldest object in the solar
system. For 10 points, identify this largest moon of Neptune.
ANSWER: Triton
Recent mapping by Schenk and Zahnle revealed around one-hundred probable impact craters wider
than five kilometers in diameter here, and, like Phobos, this body is spiraling in towards the planet it
orbits. Notable landforms on its surface include the Tuonela and Ryugu plains, while its craters
include the Landvik, Kurma, and its largest, Mazomba. Other features on its surface include the Hili
and Mahilani (*) geysers and its characteristic cantaloupe terrain. Cryovolcanism is rampant on this body,
where Voyager 2 notably discovered an ice cap of nitrogen and methane on its southern pole. Known for its
retrograde orbit and extremely cold temperatures, FTP, identify this largest moon of Neptune, named after a
son of Poseidon.
ANSWER: Triton
A new example of one of these objects confirmed in 2013 is named 2011 QF99, though that object probably
spent more time as a centaur than as one of these. That confirmation came two years after Martin Connors
announced the discovery of another example of one of these, 2010 TK7, an object which is also an asteroid.
Saturn has two moons that each have objects of this type associated with them. Name these objects found at
Lagrangian points that share an orbital path with a larger object.
ANSWER: trojans (or trojan asteroid, accept Lagrangian object before it is mentioned, prompt centaur before it is mentioned, prompt "Lagrangian")
A simple example of these objects is the king post type, while the Howe and Pratt types differ only in
the direction of the diagonal. A graphical method for analyzing these objects is the Maxwell-Cremona
diagram. More commonly, these objects are analyzed in two or more parts using the method of sections, or
by using the method of joints. These structures are characterized by passive revolute, or pin, joints; thus,
unlike frames, analysis of these structures explicitly assumes a lack of moments. These structures consist of
beams arranged to form triangles, which ensures they will not change shape when bearing a load. For 10
points, name these commonly-analyzed structures from statics, which are often used to support roofs and a
namesake type of bridge.
ANSWER: trusses
Materials that become sediment through changes in this quantity are classified according to the
Bouma sequence. This property is typically measured with Jackson Units, which uses the visibility of
a flame as a standard of reference. Although it is not transparency, a circle with 2 black and 2 white
regions is used to measure this property of a fluid - that apparatus is the Secchi Disk. Circulation
driven by this quantity can be induced by (*) soil liquefaction. Adding plankton or runoff to a liquid
increases this quantity, which causes sediment to flow underwater. For 10 points, name this measure of a
murkiness of water, typically caused by particles suspended in the liquid.
ANSWER: turbidity [prompt on "currents" due to ambiguities; accept turbidity currents]
Von Karman's "logarithmic law of the wall" describes the behavior of this phenomenon near an unbounded
wall. One treatment of this behavior assumed that at small length scales, local motions are isotropic, and the
timescale associated with that theory is given as the square root of the viscosity divided by the energy
dissipation rate. The integral length scale associated with it is related to the size of eddies formed in this
regime, and the onset of this regime typically occurs at values of 4000 for the Reynolds number. For 10
points, identify this regime characterized by the chaotic flow of fluids, a type of flow which may be
occasionally experienced on airplanes.
ANSWER: turbulence [or turbulent flow]
A Markovian theory of this phenomenon is called EDQNM, while an equation governing this describes the
longitudinal velocity correlation, and is called the Karman-Howarth equation. The Klebanoff intermittency
function appears in the Cebeci-Smith model of this, and another model is the Baldwin-Lomax. Analysis of
this phenomenon sometimes makes use of the Boussinesq approximation, and the smallest length-scale on
which it can occur is named after Kolmogorov. It is often analyzed with the Reynolds-averaged NavierStokes equations, and can be studied with chaos theory. FTP, name this phenomenon that takes place in
fluids with large Reynolds number, and is characterized by the formation of eddies and vortices.
ANSWER: Turbulence
This phenomenon is characterized by energy dissipating from integral length scales to Taylor
microscales to Kolmogorov scales, an energy cascade introduced by Lewis Fry Richardson. One
contribution to the study of this phenomenon related the turbulent stresses to the mean flow, the (*)
Boussinesq hypothesis. This phenomenon is associated with vortex stretching and the development of
eddies. This phenomenon typically occurs at high Reynolds numbers, at least four thousand for pipe flow.
For 10 points, name this flow regime contrasted with laminar flow that refers to chaotic, stochastic motion.
ANSWER: turbulent flow [or turbulence]
This phenomenon occurs at high Reynolds numbers and is characterized by pressure drops proportional
to the square of the flow rate. Poiseuille's (pwah-SOOL's) Law does not hold for fluids undergoing this
phenomenon, which is characterized by a bulk velocity not parallel to "swirls" or "eddies" in the fluid. For
10 points, name this most common type of fluid flow, which is contrasted with laminar flow and
responsible for bumpy airplane rides.
ANSWER: turbulence [or turbulent flow]
The proportionality between the rate of transport of a component in this type of system and that
component's gradient rate of transport is given by the austausch coefficient. During this process, the
velocity difference is proportional to the distance to the one-third power, according to Kolmogorov.
The statistical explanations for it arise because the solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations are
unstable past a certain point, generally above a Reynolds number of four thousand. For 10 points,
name this chaotic flow, contrasted with laminar flow.
ANSWER: turbulent flow [or turbulence]
Kolmogorov developed a model explaining how an influx of energy triggers this type of
phenomenon. It can be characterized by the appearance of von Karman vortex streets and significant
non-linearities in the Navier-Stokes equation. It occurs when the ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces
exceeds a critical value. Large values of the Reynolds number characterize this type of flow. For 10
points, name this chaotic type of fluid flow, contrasted with laminar flow, which can result in irregular
air motion in the atmosphere capable of affecting aircraft flight.
ANSWER: turbulent flow [or turbulence; accept chaotic flow before mentioned]
Bruits (broots) detected by stethoscope are the result of this effect in arteries, and the austausch coefficient
describes the transfer of momentum by this process. This phenomenon was once thought to be explained by
Landau-Hopf theory, and this is measured in Kolmogorov (kohl-moh-GAW-rawf) scales based on the rate
of energy dissipation per unit mass in addition to kinematic (kai-nuh-MAA-tik) viscosity. The NavierStokes (nay-vee-"ear" stohks) equations cannot be solved exactly for this process, which is characterized by
Reynolds numbers above 4000. Observed in ocean currents and around airplane wing-tips, name this type
of chaotic fluid motion whose vortices and eddies are often contrasted with laminar flow.
ANSWER: turbulence [accept turbulent flow]
This problem was first proposed by Paul Langevin. One answer to this problem notes the change in the rate
of the passage of time after the turnaround, which causes the spaceship to change inertial frames. Name this
relativistic thought experiment where, thanks to high speed travel, two people born at the same time can
have different ages.
ANSWER: twin paradox
This number is the dimension of the phase space of a free particle confined to a plane. For the Earth-Sun
system, the Lagrange point of this number is the furthest from the Sun. One statement given this number
describes the areal velocity of a certain system as constant. The spin projection quantum number has this
many possible values. Systems with more than this number of gravitating bodies are non-integrable. The
moment of inertia is proportional to mass times this power of linear dimension. This number of parallel
lines represents a capacitor in a circuit diagram. For 10 points, which numbered law of Newton states that
"F equals m a"?
ANSWER: two [or L2; or Kepler's second law; or two-body problem; or squared; or second power; o Newton's second law]
Aside from the three points collinear with the massive bodies, there are this many Lagrange points
for a planet-sun system. The differential equation for a harmonic oscillator is of this order. The
n-body problem is solvable for n less than or equal to this number, and taking the derivative of
position this many times yields (*) acceleration. The force of gravity is inversely proportional to this
power of the distance. For 10 points, identify this number of charges in a dipole.
ANSWER: two [accept other forms like twice or second, accept square]
Theories in this many dimensions that have a factorizable n-body matrix satisfy the Yang-Baxter
theorem, and thus are integrable. The Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard model has tunneling between
cavities containing atoms with this many levels. Bertrand's theorem states that a problem named for
this many objects has only two potentials which lead to stable, closed (*) orbits. The Laplace-RungeLenz vector is used to characterize that system with this many bodies, which is the subject of the Kepler
problem. Transitions to this energy level of the hydrogen atom typically generates lines in the visible
portion of the spectrum and are named for Balmer. For 10 points, give this number, which is also the
number of protons in the helium atom.
ANSWER: two
The outgoing intensity of Rayleigh scattering of light off a molecule is proportional to this power of
the molecule's polarizability. For each component of a system's Hamiltonian proportional to a degree
of freedom raised to this power, there exists one-half times Boltzmann's constant times temperature
amount of energy in the system according to the equipartition theorem. This is the total number of
quarks and antiquarks in a (*) meson, and it's also the number of up quarks in a proton. In classical
mechanics, the kinetic energy of a particle is equal to one half times the mass times the velocity raised to
this power. The law of thermodynamics of this number states entropy always increases in a closed system.
For 10 points, Newton's law of what number states F equals M A.
ANSWER: 2 [or second, etc.]
The solution to this problem yields a conserved quantity given by the cross product of linear and angular
momentum minus a term proportional to the position vector. This problem is typically simplified by
calculating the reduced mass, which allows one to reduce this problem to the motion of the center of mass in
a central potential. The inverse-square force in this problem generates the conserved Runge-Lenz vector,
and for positive energies results in an eccentricity of greater than 1 and hyperbolic trajectories; the other
possible solutions include parabolic, circular, and elliptical trajectories, the latter of which are bounds
states. The solution to this problem also yields such rules as the "equal areas in equal time" law. For ten
points, identify this problem whose solution describes the orbit of a pair of gravitationally bound objects.
ANSWER: gravitational two body problem [or Kepler problem]
This quantity divided by lambda yields k, the wavenumber. For a wire-wrapped toroid, the
magnetic field is inversely proportional to this factor times the radius of the toroid according to
Ampere's law, which also gives the magnetic field of an infinite wire as inversely proportional to this
factor times radial distance. This entire quantity, all squared, over big G times stellar mass is equal
to the square of the planetary orbital period over the cube the semimajor axis of its orbit according
to Kepler's third law. Twice this value appears multiplied by the permittivity of free space in the
denominator of (*) Coulomb's law. For small angles, the period of a pendulum is equal to this quantity
times the square root of length over gravitational acceleration. Frequency multiplied by this quantity gives
angular frequency. For 10 points, identify this value that is the period of the sine and cosine functions.
ANSWER: two pi
It arose from the combination of the statement that all modes of a system at equilibrium have an average
energy of kT/2, suggested by the equipartition theorem, with the predictions of the Rayleigh-Jeans law. This
suggested there was no peak wavelength on the associated intensity-wavelength curve according to classical
mechanics, but Planck's introduction of quantized energies resolved this paradox. For 10 points, identify
this prediction of classical mechanics asserting that an ideal black-body could emit infinite energy at
sufficiently short wavelengths, which give this phenomenon its name.
ANSWER: ultraviolet catastrophe [prompt on Rayleigh-Jeans catastrophe]
The Lyman series is found in this spectrum of light, which is the site of most Cherenkov radiation.
Errors occur when using the Rayleigh-Jeans law to find the energy emitted by a black body during this
spectrum's namesake catastrophe. Its wavelength is between ten and 400 nanometers, so it is longer than
X-rays but shorter than visible light. It is also emitted by black lights. For 10 points, name this type of
radiation that is absorbed by ozone layer when it comes from the sun.
ANSWER: ultraviolet light [or UV light; accept "radiation" or "spectrum" for "light"]
Most Cherenkov radiation occurs in this spectrum, and the Rayleigh-Jeans law breaks down in this
radiation's spectrum, causing its namesake "catastrophe." One kind of spectroscopy utilizes light in the
visible range and this range, which encompasses wavelengths between 10 and 400 nanometers. For 10
points, name this type of radiation, emitted by blacklights, that includes light with a shorter wavelength than
visible light but longer than that of x-rays.
ANSWER: ultraviolet light [or ultraviolet radiation; or ultraviolet spectrum; or UV light/spectrum/radiation]
In special relativity, such a relationship exists between energy and time as a result of the Robertson-
Schrodinger relation. In harmonic analysis, viewing a function and its Fourier transform as conjugate
variables on the time-frequency domain will result in the inequality that the infinite integral of the squares
of the time and position of the function multiplied by that of its Fourier transform is greater than 1 over 16
pi squared, resulting in a formalized statement of this principle. The most famous version of this principle
results when one notes that the wave functions of the momentum and position are Fourier transform pairs,
resulting in serious complications in experimentation at the particle level. For 10 points, what is this
physical principle whose quantum analog was formulated by a student of Niels Bohr in 1926?
ANSWER: uncertainty principle [do not accept "Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle"]
One facility in this nation conducted the CDF and D-Zero experiments, which discovered the top quark.
One scientific facility in this nation discovered that the number of solar neutrinos was less than half of the
expected value. The world's first nuclear reactor was developed in this nation. Another group of scientists
working in this nation conducted the "Trinity" test; that group of scientists included Enrico Fermi and J.
Robert Oppenheimer. For ten points, name this nation home to the Tevatron at Fermilab and the Los Alamos
National Laboratory.
ANSWER: United States of America
Page and Ceilker used a quantum decision process to determine the measurement procedure of this,
while Saulnier and Frisch used ballistic motion to measure it. In the first experiment to calculate it, a
small ball (*) was placed to the outside of a larger ball within an isolating box, with the entire apparatus
inside a barn with an opening for a telescope. The telescope observed the point when the torsion of the rope
equaled the attraction between the two lead balls. For 10 points, name this constant measured by the
Cavendish experiment that controls the weakest of the fundamental forces.
ANSWER: universal gravitational constant [prompt on gravity; accept G or big G; do not accept "little g"]
One theory as to why this quantity is so small involves ordinary particles being attached to only one brane,
and one experiment which calculated this quantity consisted of a torsion balance with two lead balls. This
quantity was measured by Henry Cavendish in his experiment to calculate the density of the earth, and the
escape velocity is the square root of two times the mass times this quantity over distance. For 10 points,
identify this constant equal to six point six seven times ten to the negative eleven, found in an inverse square
law governing the attraction of two large objects.
ANSWER: universal gravitational constant [accept Big G]
John Mitchell's experimental design, instrumental in this value's determination, appeared in
"Philosophical Transactions." This value, in units of meters cubed over kilograms seconds squared,
can be multiplied by an object's mass to yield a parameter denoted by the Greek letter mu. In
measuring the Earth's [*] density relative to that of water by a torsion balance, it was indirectly calculated
70 years after Newton had proposed its existence as a proportionality constant in an inverse square law
expression. For 10 points, Henry Cavendish measured what value, associated with the weakest of the
fundamental forces, symbolized by a capital G?
ANSWER: universal gravitational constant [prompt on partial answers; accept big G; prompt on just "G"]
This value is thought to vary at low accelerations in MOND theory. The hierarchy problem asks why
its value is so small, which is explained in string theory, by having the gauge boson associated with
this value not fixed to a brane. Cavendish measured this constant with a (*) torsion balance. Like
Boltzman's constant, this fundamental constant does not occur in the formula for the fine structure constant.
For 10 points, name this constant found in an inverse square law describing the mutual attraction of matter.
ANSWER: Universal Gravitational Constant [accept big g, accept logical equivalents such as gravity, prompt on "g", prompt on "Newton's constant"]
When this number is multiplied by an object's mass, the result is a "parameter" symbolized mu. It's not the
mass of the Earth, but its isolation came from an experiment using a torsion balance run by Henry
Cavendish. It helps find the strength a force that is inversely related to the square of two objects- distance
and directly proportional to those objects- masses. Roughly 6.67 times 10 to the negative 11th power, this
is, for 10 points, what constant of proportionality symbolized capital G?
ANSWER: universal gravitational constant [accept 6.67428x10-11 before mentioned; prompt "G" or "big G"]
This quantity can be measured with a Fabry-Perot pendulum, while its Gaussian version is the square root of
the quantity typically referred to by this name. A better-known experiment for determining this value was
originally conceived to measure the density of the earth; it used two large lead balls connected to a torsion
balance, and was conducted by Henry Cavendish. It also appears as the constant of proportionality in an
inverse-square law named for Newton. Name this constant that, in units of kilogram meters squared per
second squared, is approximately equal to 6.67 times ten to the negative eleven.
ANSWER: universal gravitational constant [accept big G; prompt on G; accept Newton's constant before "Newton"]
It is equivalent to the Planck length cubed divided by the product of the Planck mass and the square of the
Planck time. Einstein used it in his theory of general relativity, which worked with the earlier equations of
Isaac Newton, which also used it. Henry Cavendish most famously measured it with a torsion balance in
1798 while trying to calculate Earth's density relative to water. FTP, name this constant which is used to
calculate the attraction between objects with mass caused by its namesake force, with a value of 6.67 times
10 to the negative 11 meters cubed per kilogram second squared.
ANSWER: Universal Gravitational Constant
The cosmological constant equals eight pi, times this value, times the vacuum energy density, over the
speed of light to the fourth. The product of it and the central mass is symbolized mu, and is divided
by four pi squared in a common statement of Kepler's Third Law. This constant was first measured
in an experiment which calculated Earth's density with a (*) torsion balance. That Cavendish
experiment calculated this value to be around 6.7 times ten to the negative eleventh. This constant appears
in an inverse-square law proposed by Newton. For ten points, name this constant measuring the strength of
a certain attractive force, symbolized "Big G."
ANSWER: universal gravitational constant [or "Big G" before mention; accept "6.7 x 10-11 before mention; do not accept or prompt on either "gravity" or "little g"]
Fixler and Kasevich's measurement of this quantity relied on measuring the differential
acceleration of two cesium samples. This quantity appears multiplied by the density and eight-thirds
pi in one term of the Friedmann equations. This constant appears over the speed of light to the fourth
power in the coefficient of the stress-energy tensor in Einstein's field equations. A device invented by
John Michell was used in the first measurement of this quantity; that experiment used a (*) torsion
balance and was done by Henry Cavendish, who originally was trying to measure the density of the earth.
For 10 points, name this constant equal to 6.67 times 10 to the negative 11th in SI units, which is multiplied
by two masses over r squared in a law named for Newton.
ANSWER: big G [or universal gravitational constant or Newton's constant before mention]
The High-Z Supernova Search is currently attempting to trace the expansion of this entity. In 2008,
WMAP confirmed within a two percent chance of error that its curvature is flat. About 72 percent of
this entity's mass-energy density is composed of dark energy, and this entity's age can be measured by
fluctuations in cosmic microwave background radiation. Its expansion is explained by Hubble's Law, and if
Omega is greater than one, it will eventually collapse in the "Big Crunch." For 10 points, name this entity
whose origins are explained by the Big Bang.
ANSWER: The Universe
The FLRW models of this entity include the hyperbolic Picard horn as well as the Poincare
dodecahedral space, but its most popular model has the density factor omega equal to 1. Max
Tegmark proposed a four-tier hierarchy of one type of it, and the fine-tuned theory of this entity
incorporates six dimensionless constants. Alan Guth proposed an explanation for the horizon
problem, which arises from the apparent uniformity of (*) CMBR temperatures in it. Data from the
WMAP currently suggest 71% of it is dark energy, which drives the acceleration of its expansion. Hubble's
law governs the expansion of, for ten points, what entity whose origin might be explained by the Big Bang
theory?
ANSWER: the Universe (prompt on multiverse)
According to one model, this entity originally consisted of a hot, dense, gas called ylem. Cyclic
models of this object include the ekpyrotic model. Arguments about the nature of certain constants
are the basis for the suggestion that this object is finely tuned. WMAP has found that, for the most
part, this item is flat. Alan Guth proposed that this object rapidly increased in size during the
inflationary epoch. A.A. Friedman solved Einstein's equations to produce a model of this object
originating from a (*) singularity. Some models of this object propose that it is heading towards a heat
death or that it will eventually collapse with a Big Crunch. For 10 points, name this object whose expansion
is modeled by the Big Bang.
ANSWER: the universe
One model of this object is the Poincare homology sphere or dodecahedral space. The critical density
parameter, omega, of this object is required to be, and is, very close to 1. In this object, "the End of
Greatness" is a scale past which lumpiness becomes homogeneous and (*) isotropic. That closeness to 1
is considered to be part of the fine-tuning problem of this object. Within 0.5%, WMAP has found this
object to be flat. The strong anthropic principle argues that this object is restricted to conditions that allow
for human life. The horizon problem of this object came about due to the observed uniform temperatures of
the CMB and can be solved with cosmic inflation. For 10 points, name this object that was created in the
Big Bang and encompasses everything that exists.
ANSWER: the universe
Two answers required. The delta baryons are composed of these two particles, which are the only ones that
can decay to each other via W particles. Name these constituents of the neutron and the proton, that do not
affect the strangeness, charmness, topness, and bottomness numbers, and are the two lightest flavors of
quarks.
ANSWER: up and down flavors of quarks (accept in either order)
Though this celestial body is has more than fourteen times the mass of Earth, its surface gravity is the
closest to Earth's with 8.76 seconds per meters squared. It was actually the first planet to be discovered by
modern science and by complete accident by William Herschel. There are trace amounts of methane in its
atmosphere that give it and its sister planet their blue appearance. This planet is unique most of all in that it
has an axial tilt of 97 degrees meaning that its moons go up and around its equator and that the planet
actually spins on its side. FTP name this seventh planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Uranus
Along with a more distant neighbor, this object may contain chunks of diamond floating in a sea of
liquid diamond, which may explain why this planet's magnetic poles are shifted almost 60 degrees
from its rotational axis. This body's tropopause measures roughly 50 kelvin, which makes it the
coldest planet in the solar system. Like Venus, this planet has a (*) retrograde orbit, and it is orbited by
27 moons which include Titania, Umbriel, and Ariel. William Herschel discovered this planet, whose axis
of rotation has a roughly 90 degree tilt. For 10 points, identify this gas giant which orbits the Sun between
Saturn and Neptune.
ANSWER: Uranus
Cavazzoni et al. predicted that this was the smaller of two bodies to possess a body of superionic
water. The first dark spots on this entity were discovered in 2006 by the Hubble Space Telescope, and
in its past, this entity may have sported an ammonia-water ocean with high electrical conductivity.
This planet's largest moon contains oval shaped regions called coronae and a large cliff called Verona
Rupes. William Lassel and (*) Gerard Kuiper discovered the largest moons of this planet. This planet
possesses the coldest atmosphere of all the planets. Like Venus, this "ice giant" is known for its retrograde
motion, and its moons include Titania, Ariel, and Miranda. For 10 points, name this green-blue planet,
known for its extreme axial tilt.
ANSWER: Uranus'
This object is the planned destination of the NASA HORUS mission as well as the planned
destination of a ESA / NASA joint pathfinder mission. This object's magnetosphere is off the center
of the axis of rotation by one third of the object's radius. A large white cumulonimbus cloud was
discovered on this planet, while a dark spot was discovered in 2006. Momentary blinks while this planet
was occulting SAO 158687 led to the discovery of five rings around this planet; one ring, Epsilon, is
shepherded by moons Cordelia and Ophelia, while this planet's largest moon is Titania. 21 Earth-year
seasons caused by a sideways axis is characteristic of, for 10 points, this pale blue planet seventh from the
sun.
ANSWER: Uranus
In 1977, this object was discovered to have a faint ring system when scientists on Earth observed it
occulting a star. An irregularity in this object's orbit was noticed by the French astronomer Urbain Le
Verrier, who used that fact to predict the existence of one of this object's neighbors. Some scientists
believe that this planet was struck by an Earth-sized object early in its history, which could explain why it
is tilted 97 degrees and thus is almost completely on its side. For 10 points, name this planet discovered
by William Herschel, which is between Saturn and Neptune.
ANSWER: Uranus
This constellation includes the pair of galaxies M81 and M82, and M97, the "Owl Nebula." Tania Borealis
and Tania Australis form this constellation's feet, while Megrez, Alioth, Mizar, and Alkaid form this
constellation's tail. Dubhe and Merak are pointer stars found in this constellation that point to Polaris. This
circumpolar constellation contains an asterism referred to as "The Plough" in Great Britain, and as "The
Big Dipper" in the U.S. For 10 points, name this constellation that is also known as "The Great Bear."
ANSWER: Ursae Majoris [accept Great Bear early; do not accept "Ursa Minor," "Little Bear" or "Bi Dipper"]
The Higgs field is unique in that it has a non-zero expectation value in this state. Theoretical
calculations of the energy density of this entity differ from its measured value by about 120 orders of
magnitude, a problem which has been called the worst prediction in theoretical physics. The Casimir
effect is a small force between two non-charged metal plates in this medium. The index of refraction
for a material is defined as the speed of light in this (*) medium over the speed of light in the material.
The best ones of these created on earth are about ten to the negative seven or negative eight Pascals. For 10
points, name this term for totally empty space which is abhorred by nature.
ANSWER: vacuum (accept cosmological constant; prompt on "space" or "the universe")
One phenomenon that happens under this condition occurs in the presence of two narrowly
separated metal plates; it is characterized by a force proportional to the negative fourth power of
their separation. A difference between the energy of the 2s and 2p energy levels owes to the
interaction between electrons and this entity. The (*) Casimir effect and the Lamb shift arise due to the
properties of this condition, which was used by the Newcomen steam engine to drive a piston. In Gaussian
units, permittivity and permeability are both one at this condition. For 10 points, name this phenomenon
where a volume of space contains very little matter.
ANSWER: vacuum
The power of this state was demonstrated in 1656 by two greased and joined pieces of copper which
were attached to teams of horses in the Magdeburg Hemispheres experiment of Otto von Guericke
(guh-REH-kee). Guericke built on the work of Evangelista Toricelli (eh-van-guh-LEE-stuh
torr-ih-CHEH-lee) in creating this state, which was also studied by Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke.
Creating this state was an important goal of seventeenth-century science, in order to aid in mining and
drainage projects. For 10 points, identify this physical state consisting of the absence of all matter.
ANSWER: vacuum
This condition is necessary for the Casimir effect to hold, and dielectric constants are computed in
comparison to this condition. Wormholes are solutions to the Einstein field equations under this condition,
while radiation is the only form of heat exchange that can occur in one. This condition has the theoretically
lowest possible index of refraction, and in the Magdeburg experiment the two halves of a metal sphere
could not be separated when this was created inside the sphere. An approximation of this condition is used
to freeze-dry food and generated with an air pump. Name this space that is empty of matter and which
nature is said to abhor.
ANSWER: perfect vacuum [prompt on free space]
Materials are prepared for use in this medium by "baking them out" to remove volatiles. The technique of
sputtering is used to deposit coatings and films in the presence of this medium. A medium that is similar to
this one is said to be "rarefied". This medium has zero electromagnetic susceptibility, and hence a refractive
index of precisely 1, not accounting for its polarization by virtual pair production. The beam lines of
particle accelerators are filled with this medium, as are cathode ray tubes. This medium is ideally
characterized by having zero pressure. For 10 points, name this medium that is characterized by the absence
of matter, found in outer space.
ANSWER: vacuum [or free space; accept partial vacuum]
Along with the charge of an electron, this fundamental constant appears in the numerator of the Lamb
formula for determining the diamagnetic contribution to the shielding constant. In the cgs-emu system, this
constant is set to one. This constant is multiplied by H on the x-axis of B-field versus H-field plots. In
standard cgs units, it is equal to four pi times ten to the negative seventh volt-seconds per ampere-meter. It
is multiplied by current in the integral form of Ampere's Law. In SI units this quantity is equal to four pi
times ten to the negative seventh. One over the square of the speed of light equals this quantity times the
vacuum permittivity. For 10 points, name this fundamental constant designated mu-nought.
ANSWER: vacuum permeability [or permeability of free space; or magnetic constant; or mu nought before read; or mu sub zero before "mu" is read; prompt on permeability; prompt on mu before read]
The closest part of this to Earth is at the South Atlantic Anomaly, which slowly expands northward and
shifts westward, probably due to the weakening of the magnetic field. It is believed that its particles, mostly
protons and electrons, come from cosmic radiation and possibly solar wind. Existing in the magnetosphere
[mag-NEE-toesphere], this is in the shape of an inner and outer torus. Name these regions named after the
scientist who headed the missions to find them in 1958.
ANSWER: Van Allen radiation belts
Robyn Millan is leading an experiment called BARREL to study these, while a previous cancelled
experiment to study them was called IMEX. A proposal by Robert Foyt called HiVolt is aimed at drawing
energy from these entities which contain a "safe zone" caused by VLF waves, and that reside in the
Chapman Ferraro Cavity. They were discovered by Explorer I in 1958, and the are formed due to a
magnetic-mirror effect. The inner one is made mostly of high energy protons, while the outer one is mostly
composed of electrons. For ten points, name these bands of energetic charged particles around the Earth,
which are trapped in position by the Earth's magnetic field.
ANSWER: Van Allen radiation belts
Non-thermal radiation emissions from Jupiter are caused by electrons trapped in regions
analogous to these. Tests like Hardtack Teak and Starfish Prime, which are high-altitude nuclear
tests have created artificial versions of these regions. Confined to an area which is about 65 degrees
from the celestial equator, the inner one of these phenomena was first confirmed by (*) Explorer I and
contains much higher energy than the outer one. For 10 points, name these tori of highly energized particles
or plasma which surround the earth and are named after an American astronomer.
ANSWER: Van Allen Belts [prompt on radiation belts]
Lazard built a device from two of these at the Grand Palais in 1937, which produced a tension of 5
megavolts, and a newer device designed to replace this one uses metal pellets and nylon links and is called
the Pelletron. Some of them still utilize the triboelectric effect as in the original one which used a silk
ribbon. Consisting of a metal comb in contact with a belt being pulled by a pulley, this is for 10 points, what
device, which develops charge on a spherical conductor, which can then safely be transferred to the body in
many science museum exhibits.
ANSWER: Van de Graaff generator
In a bizarre part of the history of astronomy, E.C. Pickering claimed that the study of these would
particularly appeal to women. Though now associated with pulsars, the oblique rotator model was
originally developed to explain Ap stars of this type. Stars that strongly display the distinguishing
effect of these stars include Alpha squared Canum Venaticorum stars. Many of these are located in
the (*) instability strip. Globular clusters may contain the RR Lyrae sub-type of these stars. Algol is a
famous eclipsing binary type of these stars. Henrietta Leavitt worked with a special type of these stars.
Edwin Hubble was able to use ones that exhibit a close relationship between their period and luminosity, as
standard candles. Cepheids are a sub-type of, for 10 points, what stars that exhibit modulating luminosity
over time?
ANSWER: variable stars
Altair and Denebola fall into the Delta Scuti class of these entities. Rotation with an ellipsoidal shape leads
to this classification, and eclipsing binary stars such as Algol are also classified as this. One of this class of
stars is the RR Lyrae type, which is among a class with period-luminosity relationship as determined by
Henrietta Levitt that occupies the instability strip like many other stars of this type. For 10 points, give this
classification of a star that exhibits changing apparent brightness witnessed from Earth, as seen in the
Cepheid type.
ANSWER: variable star
Designations of these begin at R, since the last letter used in the Bayer naming system is Q. Examples of
these include the red giant Mira, as well as Algol, which is a result of a companion. One type of these can
be used to measure the Hubble Constant, as due to the constant nature of the Chandrasekhar Limit, they
reach the same brightness. They come in intrinsic and extrinsic varieties, depending on whether or not the
star itself is the cause for the titular phenomenon. Novae and Cepheids are examples of, FTP, this type of
star which changes brightness over time.
ANSWER: Variable star
These stars occupy the instability strip of the Hertzprung-Russell diagram. Many members of
this class of stars are ellipsoidal in shape. Edwin Hubble used a type of these stars to calculate his
namesake law. Found in globular clusters, RR Lyrae are a population II subclass of these stars. W
Virginis stars are another population II star in this class. The (*) Cepheid (SEH-fid) type of these stars
are used as a standard candle for measuring distance. For 10 points, name these stars whose apparent
brightness changes.
ANSWER: variable stars [or variables]
U Geminorum is an example of dwarf novae that are one form of the cataclysmic type of these objects, and
David Fabricius discovered the first object of this type, originally known as Omicron Ceti. The extrinsic
types of these objects are generally caused by rotation or eclipsing, as seen with ones of the Algol type.
One class of these objects was studied by Henrietta Leavitt, which led to one type of them being used as
standard candles. For 10 points, name these types of stars that have noted relationships between their
periods and luminosities, exemplified by the RR Lyrae and Cepheid varieties.
ANSWER: variable stars (you really can-t accept any specific type, except "Cataclysmic" before it is said)
One notable example of these is part of the AAVSO's Citizen Sky project, and that object is most likely a
binary star system surrounded by an opaque disk of dust. That object is Epsilon Aurigae. Many of these
occupy the instability strip on the H-R Diagram, and Betelgeuse and Antares are semiregular types of these.
Henrietta Levitt established the period-luminosity relationship for a certain type of these. The Mira types of
these have a period of more than a year, while RR Lyrae types have a period of less than a day. These are
classified using their light curves, and Cepheid ones can be used as standard candles. Identify these stars
that display a fluctuating apparent magnitude.
ANSWER: variable stars [accept binary stars before mentioned, prompt on "stars" before mentioned]
The commutator of this quantity with momentum appears in the operator for dipole transition
matrix elements. The inverse Fourier transform of this function is used to derive the Darwin
interaction term in the Lagrangian for a particle in a field. This quantity is equal to a constant times
an integral of the current density over volume in the definition of retarded potentials. The
importance of this quantity was shown in an experiment in which a beam of electrons were split while
travelling (*) around a solenoid, causing them to acquire a 180 degree phase shift named for Berry. This
quantity, which is added to the gradient of an arbitrary function in a gauge transformation, was shown to
have physical relevance by the Aharonov-Bohm effect. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized A,
whose curl gives the magnetic field.
ANSWER: Vector potential
Reynolds number can be calculated using the superficial version of this quantity, and it is modified in the
Minkowski metric by the addition of proper time. The change in one value of this quantity relates Fermat's
principle to Snell's law. Waves have two varieties of this quantity, one given by w/k [omega over k] and
another by dw/dk [dee omega over dee k] which differ only in a dispersive medium. Its Gallilean transform
is replaced with a Lorentz transform in general relativity, and it occurs in the formula for the Lorentz factor.
When multiplied by force it yields power, and it is squared in the formula for kinetic energy. For 10 points,
name this quantity, the time derivative of displacement and the vector analogue of speed.
ANSWER: Velocity [prompt on v, do not accept or prompt on speed]
In aerodynamic theory, the value of this quantity at a point can be found by dividing the strength of the
vortex by two times pi times the distance from the vortex line by an application of the Biot-Savart Law. For
a vector field of this quantity, if the divergence is zero, a fluid is incompressible. The Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution describes this property of particles in gasses, and vorticity is the curl of this quantity. One effect
states that an increase in this quantity occurs with a decrease in pressure or potential energy, and that effect
is named for Bernoulli. For 10 points, name this vector quantity that is the measurement of the rate of
change in position.
ANSWER: velocity [accept speed or rate of flow until "vector quantity"]
The curl of the field of this quantity for a fluid is the vorticity. One type of this quantity is equal in
magnitude to the square root of quantity 2 times big G times M divided by r, and is the value needed
to escape an object's gravitational pull. The (*) terminal variety of it is reached when the drag force is
equal to the gravitational force, so an object experiences no acceleration. Its second derivative with respect
to time is jerk, and it is the time-derivative of position. For ten points, identify this vector quantity from
physics, consisting of an object's speed and direction.
ANSWER: linear velocity (do not accept or prompt on "angular velocity")
According to Kepler's second law, the "areal" type of this quantity for a planet is constant using the sun as
the origin. Dividing Planck's constant by the product of mass and this quantity yields the de Broglie
wavelength. The phase type of this quantity for a wave is defined as the angular frequency of the wave
divided by the wavenumber. When the sum of the drag force and buoyancy equals the downward force of
gravity, the terminal type of this quantity is achieved. For 10 points, name this physical vector quantity
defined an object's rate of positional change.
ANSWER: velocity [prompt on v; do not accept "speed"]
The most probable value for this quantity in an ideal gas is root two "RT" over molar mass. Power is the dot
product of force and this quantity. Centripetal force equals mass times the square of this quantity divided by
radius. The value of this quantity that is needed to escape a gravitational field is called its "escape" type.
Linear momentum equals mass times this quantity, which, when squared and multiplied with mass, equals
kinetic energy. For 10 points, acceleration is the time derivative of what vector quantity that measures the
rate of change in position?
ANSWER: velocity [accept speed]
An important distinction in waves is between the phase and group descriptions of this. In relativity,
its values cannot be added directly. The square root of "two GM over r" describes one form of this,
and "mg over b" describes another, caused by air resistance. Those formulas respectively correspond
to the (*) escape and terminal forms of it. This quantity's derivative is acceleration. For 10 points, name this
vector quantity that describes the rate of change of position.
ANSWER: velocity [accept speed until just after "mg over b"; do not accept or prompt on it afterwards]
The Maxwell-Boltzmann (BOLTS-men) distribution describes the "root mean square" of this quantity
for classical gases. In fluids, vorticity is the curl of this quantity, which increases as pressure decreases
according to the Bernoulli (BURR-new-lee) principle. Jerk is the second time derivative of this quantity,
whose first time derivative is acceleration. For 10 points, name this quantity that describes the rate of
change of position, the vector analogue of speed.
ANSWER: velocity [accept speed until "vector" is read]
Components of this quantity at a point are given by derivatives of the stream function. The curl of the
vector field of this quantity is the vorticity. For a banked curve, the max value of this is equal to the square
root of r times g times coefficient of static friction. The difference between the initial and final values of
this quantity is equal to time times acceleration. For 10 points, name this quantity, which is given by the
rate of change of displacement.
ANSWER: fluid velocity
Drag force is proportional to both the radius of an object and this quantity by Stokes' Law.
Centripetal acceleration equals this quantity squared, divided by the radius of the circle. It can also
be found from the first time derivative of (*) position. When the force of gravity is balanced out by drag,
a falling object reaches its "terminal" form of this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to
momentum divided by mass, measured in meters per second, that has both magnitude and direction.
ANSWER: velocity [prompt on speed before "direction" is read]
At the Landau critical form of this quantity, excitations first gain negative energy. In an irrotational fluid
field, this quantity is related to pressure by the Bernoulli equation. The partial derivative of angular
frequency with respect to wavenumber gives one form of this quantity. Wavelength over period gives the
"phase" type of this quantity, which is different from the "group" form. For an object in free fall and in a
perfect vacuum, this quantity equals the local gravitational constant times time, as it is the antiderivative of
acceleration. For 10 points, name this vector quantity whose magnitude equals an object's speed.
ANSWER: velocity
In fluids, the curl of this quantity's field gives vorticity. The Lorentz factor is equivalent to one minus this
quantity squared over the speed of light squared all raised to the one half power. Kinetic energy is one-half
times mass times this quantity squared, and momentum is equivalent to the mass multiplied by this quantity.
Its time derivative is acceleration. For 10 points, name this vector quantity equal to the displacement over
the time, whose magnitude is speed.
ANSWER: velocity [do not accept "speed"]
When two values of this vector quantity are added together, you are supposed to divide the initial sum
by one plus the product of the values over the maximum value of this quantity squared. This vector
quantity's magnitude is squared and multiplied by half of fluid density when Bernoulli's principle is
written in terms of pressure. This quantity is crossed with magnetic field strength and multiplied by
charge to find the force of a magnetic field. The magnitude of this vector quantity is squared and
divided by radius to find centripetal acceleration. Name this vector quantity equal to displacement
divided by time.
ANSWER: velocity
The Kelvin-Helmholtz instability comes from a differential of this quantity, and the Maxwell-
Boltzmann distribution describes this quantity for particles in an ideal gas. The "group" type of this
quantity is the derivative of the angular frequency with respect to wavenumber. Kepler's second law
states that the (*) areal type of this quantity is constant, and the acceleration due to centrifugal force is
equal to the square of this quantity over radius. Its time derivative is acceleration, and it is the time
derivative of position. For 10 points, name this quantity that measures how fast something is going.
ANSWER: velocity (accept speed)
Dividing a wave's angular frequency with its angular wavenumber yields this quantity's "group" form. The
square root of 3 times the gas constant times temperature divided by the molar mass of a gas describes the
"root mean square" measure of this quantity. Integrating this function of a particle from T1 to T2 yields the
displacement. When the force of gravity on an object in free fall equals the drag force, the object has
reached the "terminal" form of this value, which is constant because acceleration equals zero. For 10 points,
name this vector quantity with units of meters per second and a magnitude equal to speed.
ANSWER: velocity
The pressure gradient is defined as viscosity times the Laplacian of this quantity in creeping flow. In
classical gases, the most probable magnitude of this quantity is equal to two-thirds of the root mean
square magnitude of this quantity. The curl of this quantity for a fluid is the (*) vorticity. In classical
gases, this quantity follows the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, which assumes that each component of
this vector is normally distributed. For 10 points, name this vector quantity whose addition in special
relativity ensures it can never exceed that of light, the time derivative of the position vector.
ANSWER: velocity
The spatial variation of this quantity in a galactic disk is plotted on a "spider diagram." The fact that
this quantity does not undergo a Keplerian decline with radius for a spiral galaxy can be explained
using either Modified Newtonian Dynamics or dark matter. The value of this quantity is plotted vs
distance from the center in a galaxy's rotation curve. One form of this quantity equals the square
root of 2 times (*) big G times the mass of an object divided by its radius. This quantity for a galaxy
relative to the earth is linearly proportional to its distance from the earth according to Hubble's Law. For 10
points name this quantity whose "escape" version is the value of it required to break free from orbit, whose
time derivative gives acceleration.
ANSWER: velocity [accept more specific answers like "radial velocity"]
Dividing the pressure gradient by viscosity returns the Laplacian of this quantity.
One version of this quantity is equal to the square root of the quantity 2 G M over
r end quantity. The drag force can be computed as this quantity squared times the drag coefficient times this
value squared times the reference area times the fluid density. The oil-drop experiment determined the
charge of the electron using the (*) "terminal" kind of this quantity. This value is the first derivative of
position with respect to time. For ten points, name the vector incorporating speed and direction.
ANSWER: velocity (accept speed before "Laplacian", accept escape velocity or terminal velocity)
The values of this quantity for ideal gas particles is described by the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution. Current density over charge density gives a "drift" type of this quantity. When the
forces of drag and buoyancy are (*) equal to gravity, an object has a "terminal" value of this quantity.
The rate of change in this vector quantity is acceleration. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the rate
of change in position.
ANSWER: velocity (accept speed before "vector")
The relativistic version of this quantity is tangent to the world line. For a modulated wave, "omega over k"
and "d omega dk" give its phase and group forms, respectively. The magnetic force on a charged particle is
proportional to "[this quantity] cross B." "Square root of 2 g R" is the minimum magnitude of this quantity
needed to escape Earth's orbit, and its vertical component is zero at the highest point of projectile motion.
Its rate of change is acceleration, and it is defined as the derivative of position. For 10 points, name this
vector quantity whose magnitude is speed.
ANSWER: velocity [prompt on "v"; do not accept "speed"]
The Peclet number is equal to the ratio of this quantity for convection to that for diffusion. A Pitot Tube is
used to measure this quantity in gases, while its value in liquids can be determined using a Venturi Meter.
Both of these devices make use of the idea that, like volume, as pressure increases, this decreases, a
principle known as Bernoulli's Equation. When this is constant, acceleration is zero. For 10 points, name
this kinematic quantity, the derivative of position, whose magnitude is equal to speed.
ANSWER: velocity [prompt on speed before it is read]
The curl of this physical quantity is given by the vorticity, and a terminal value for this quantity is achieved
when the accelerating force on an object is equal to its drag force. The magnetic force on a particle is
proportional to the cross product of this quantity and the magnetic field. Kinetic energy is equal to one-half
times mass times the magnitude of this quantity squared. Acceleration is the rate of change in this vector
quantity, which is the time derivative of position. For 10 points, name this quantity which describes an
objects speed and direction.
ANSWER: velocity [do not prompt on or accept "speed"]
In astronomy, the variation in this quantity at different galactic radii makes up a rotation curve. According
to the virial theorem, this quantity is equal to the square root of big G times mass over radius. One form of
this quantity is inversely related to the square root of a fluid's density times an object's area times the drag
coefficient. The magnitude of the centripetal acceleration is equal to this quantity squared over the radius.
One component of this quantity is equal to the direction of motion, while the other is generally equal to
distance over time. For 10 points, name this vector whose magnitude is equal to speed.
ANSWER: velocity
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution gives the distribution of "root mean square" form of this value for
classical particles. Centripetal (sen-TRIP-et-uhl) force is proportional to the square of this value, which is
equal to the quotient of an object's momentum and its mass. The second time derivative of this quantity is
jerk, while its first time derivative is acceleration. For 10 points, what quantity is the vector equivalent of
speed?
ANSWER: velocity [prompt on speed]
Two versions of this quantity are equal if the dispersion relation is linear. Adding two examples of
this quantity and dividing by one plus the product of normalized forms of this quantity is this
quantity's namesake "addition formula." The hyperbolic arctangent of this quantity divided by a
constant is additive in special relativity and is symbolized phi. One version of this quantity is given by
the angular frequency divided by the wavenumber. The curl of the vector field of this quantity for a
fluid gives the (*) vorticity. The dot product of this quantity with the force gives the power, and the
derivative of this quantity is the acceleration. For 10 points, give this vector quantity which measures the
change in position per unit time.
ANSWER: velocity [prompt on "v", prompt on "speed"]
This quantity, dotted with its tensor derivative gives the convective term in the Navier-Stokes
Equation. A converging cone and no Vena Contracta characterize a meter for measuring this that
works on an effect named for the same scientist that requires this quantity increase to satisfy the
continuity equation. Measured by the Venturi meter, this quantity, along with length of a pipe and
viscosity, is used to define the Reynolds number. Vorticity is the curl of this quantity which increases and
decreases along with pressure changes according to Bernoulli's principle. The ratio of this number to that of
sound in the same medium is called the Mach number. FTP, name this quantity which describes how fast a
liquid or gas is moving.
ANSWER: velocity
Calculating this quantity using the time elapsed for a traveling object yields a quantity sometimes
known as celerity (suh-LAIR-it-ee). Force times this quantity equals power. The instantaneous value
of this quantity is equal to the first derivative of (*) position. Multiplying this quantity by an object's
mass gives linear momentum. For 10 points, name this vector quantity, whose magnitude is the scalar
quantity known as "speed," and which is typically measured in meters per second.
ANSWER: velocity [do not accept or prompt on "speed"]
A relativistic form of this quantity can be expressed as the four-vector tangent of a world line. The
divergence of this quantity is zero for an incompressible fluid. In an irrotational fluid, it can be
expressed as the gradient of a fluid potential, since in that case the curl of this quantity, also called
the vorticity, is zero. For a planet in orbit around the sun, the areal form of this quantity is constant.
The force on a charged particle due to a magnetic field equals the charge of the particle times the (*)
cross product of this quantity and the magnetic field, according to the Lorentz force law. The kinetic energy
equals one half times m times the magnitude of this quantity squared. For 10 points, name this vector
quantity, the time derivative of position, which can be given as a speed and a direction.
ANSWER: velocity [accept fluid velocity, velocity field, etc]
The square of this quantity multiplied by density times the Fanning friction factor over two equals
the shear stress at the wall of a pipe. Multiplying the square of this quantity by density over the bulk
modulus gives the Cauchy number. The divergence of this quantity times density plus the time
derivative of density (*) equals zero according to one of Euler's equations, and Bernoulli's equation is
quadratic in this quantity. If the divergence of this quantity is zero, the flow is incompressible. In a
horizontal pipe, an increase in this quantity will be accompanied by a decrease in pressure. Taking the curl
of this quantity gives the vorticity. For 10 points, give this quantity that expresses the rate at which a fluid
flows.
ANSWER: fluid velocity (or flow velocity; or velocity field; prompt on "u"or "v")
It was the destination of the first robotic space probe mission, the Soviet Venera 1. This body's apparent
magnitude is -4.6, making it second in brightness only to the moon, and it exhibits retrograde rotation, the
slowest of any planet. Mariner 2 discovered its surface to be extremely hot, due to a runaway greenhouse
effect. FTP, name this "sister planet" to Earth, the second from the sun.
ANSWER: Venus
Japan's spacecraft Akatsuki was intended to study this astronomical object, which is home to pancake
domes caused by volcanoes. This object is responsible for a dim glow known as the ashen light. Cassini
discovered this planet's spurious moon Neith, and the spacecrafts Vega 1 and 2 studied it. This planet's
continent-like feature of Ishtar Terra is home to the Maxwell Montes [MON-teez], which contains its
highest point. This planet is home to clouds of sulfuric acid, and it is sometimes known as the morning star
or evening star. This moon-less planet's high temperature is due to the greenhouse effect. For 10 points,
name this second planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Venus
This planet was supposed to be orbited by the Akatsuki probe, but the probe misfired and will try again in a
few years, and this was also the target of the unsuccessful Mariner One mission. Its highest point is on the
Maxwell Montes, which is near its Lakshmi Planum. Like Uranus, this planet has retrograde rotation. Its
atmosphere is similar in composition to Mars, though much denser and containing clouds of sulfuric acid.
Name this bright planet with a year equal to 225 Earth days, the second planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Venus
This body has the largest greatest elongation out of all bodies that do not exhibit quadrature relative
to Earth. The "black drop" effect was previously thought to be evidence for this bodies atmosphere.
This body's 2012 occultation of a star, a consequence of its almost-8-to-13 commensurability with
Earth, was used to refine existing techniques for studying exoplanet transits. The first successful
flyby of this body, performed by the fourth in a series of (*) sixteen Soviet probes named for this body,
discovered that it has a very weak magnetic field, which was later found to be induced rather than intrinsic.
Uranus and this planet have retrograde orbits, and this planet's carbon dioxide atmosphere raises its surface
temperature to well over 400 degrees Celsius. For 10 points, name this second planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Venus
Landslides have produced scalloped margin domes on this body that resemble a round body
surrounded by legs, and were thus formerly known as "ticks." The Japanese probe Akatsuki is
planning to visit this body in 2016. Brightening of the radar reflections off its surface is posited to be
due to deposition of pyrites and sulfides in highland regions such as (*) Lakshmi Planum. It has only a
weakly induced magnetic field; the lack of a dynamo-generated field is thought to indicate a lack of core
convection, perhaps due to its lack of plate tectonics. The northern highland region of Ishtar Terra is found
on this planet, whose day is longer than its year. For 10 points, a runaway greenhouse effect occurs on what
second planet from the Sun?
ANSWER: Venus
Jeremiah Horrocks was the only person to predict a 1639 event involving the appearance of this object.
Its highest point is named for James Clerk Maxwell, and it was the target of the first two Mariner probes.
Its surface was finally mapped in the 1990s by the Magellan probe. For 10 points, name this planet, the
home of the Ishtar Terra and an atmosphere filled with clouds of sulfuric acid.
ANSWER: Venus
In recent years, scientists observing this planet have measured an increase in wind speed, which is now
around 250 miles per hour, and its atmosphere moves around the planet in four Earth days. Its atmosphere,
like that of Mars, is high in carbon dioxide. The length of a day on this planet is an unusually long 243
Earth days. Name this only planet in our solar system other than Mercury to not have a moon, the second
planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Venus
The Magellan probe mapped the surface of this planet, which includes regions called tesserae
(TEH-sah-ray). Its highest point, Maxwell Montes, is found in the Ishtar Terra region. There is no evidence
for plate tectonics on the young surface of this planet, which exhibits retrograde motion. High amounts of
sulfuric acid and carbon dioxide in its atmosphere cause a strong greenhouse effect, which gives it the
highest surface temperatures in the solar system. For 10 points, name this second planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Venus
Giovanni Riccioli was the first to note the so-called "Ashen light" glow emanating from this object.
Japan attempted to send the craft Akatsuki or "Planet-C" to this object. This object contains the regions
Alpha and Beta Regio, and its highest point is Maxwell Montes. Aside from Earth's moon, this is the
brightest natural object in the night sky. This planet's atmospheric mass is almost entirely carbon dioxide,
even though its size is very similar to Earth's, leading to its nickname of "Earth's twin." For 10 points,
name this second planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Venus
Circular, volcanic domes on this object are referred as "pancake" volcanoes. This planet was studied by
the Venera probes and lacks natural satellites. The atmosphere of this planet contains many clouds of
sulfuric acid. Although of similar size and mass to Earth, this planet is unable to sustain life due to a
runaway greenhouse effect vaporizing any water present. For 10 points, name this very hot planet with a
heavy atmosphere of carbon dioxide, the second closest planet to the Sun.
ANSWER: Venus
Its surface is characterized by regions of highly fractured crust called tesserae. The presence of
circular structures called coronae developed as a heat releasing mechanism on this body which lacks
tectonic activity, and the largest mountain on it is the Maxwell Montes. Its northern and southern
hemispheres are divided into Ishtar terra and Aphrodite terra respectively, and its atmosphere has high
concentrations of carbon dioxide and sulfuric acid. For 10 points, identify this sister planet of the Earth.
ANSWER: Venus
In 2011, JAXA launched Akatsuki to explore this planet. Alpha, Beta, and Ovda Regio are three highland
regions on this planet, which lie on the continent Ishtar Terra, home to its highest point Maxwell Montes
[MOHN-tess]. This planet is the brightest natural object in the night sky after the moon. Carbon dioxide is
the predominant gas in its atmosphere, which also contains sulfuric acid clouds. The surface of this planet is
highly volcanic. For 10 points, name this second planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Venus
The alpha regio is an area of plateau-like highlands on this planet, whose highest peak is at Maxwell
Montes. The Magellan probe mapped the surface of this planet. This planet has a day lasting longer than its
year due to retrograde rotation. This planet has a dense atmosphere mostly made of carbon dioxide, which
creates a strong greenhouse effect that makes the planet the hottest in the solar system. For 10 points, name
this "sister planet" of Earth, the second-closest to the sun and named after the Roman goddess of love.
ANSWER: Venus
This planet emits the Ashen Light. This planet was investigated by the Magellan mission. Its tallest
mountain is Maxwell Montes and one of its landmasses is Ishtar Terra. Its atmosphere contains significant
amounts of sulfuric dioxide, but it is dominated by carbon dioxide. This planet has the highest surface
temperature in the Solar System. For 10 points, name this second planet from the Sun named after the
Roman goddess of love.
ANSWER: Venus
Iron chloride in the atmosphere of this body makes it partially opaque to ultraviolet light. The
arachnoid features unique to this body were mapped by the Magellan spacecraft. This planet has
the least eccentric orbit in the solar system, while its significant topographical structures include the
Maxwell Montes, Lakshmi Planum, and Ishtar Terra. In 1610, Galileo observed the phases of this
planet, whose permanent layer of sulfuric acid clouds creates an intense greenhouse effect, giving this
planet the highest surface temperature. Its rotation is retrograde, and its size is similar to Earth's.
Name this second planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Venus
The black drop effect made it difficult to determine exactly when these events began. Jeremiah Horrocks
was the first person to observe one of these events. Captain Cook was sent to observe one of these in Tahiti.
Simon Newcomb calculated the astronomical unit as about 149 million kilometers after estimating the solar
parallax based on observations of these events. One of these happened June 5 and 6 of 2012, and the next
will be in 2117. For ten points, name these astronomical events where the second planet can be seen moving
across the face of the sun.
ANSWER: transit of Venus [this is a specific term so don't accept anything that uses the word "eclipse" or other defined terms, but prompt on descriptive answers such as "Venus passing in front of the sun" until read]
This celestial body is believed to be the parent body of 1999 TA10. The snowman craters are located here.
It's chemical makeup is similar to Magnya and this body has exposed pyroxenite. HED meteorites are
believed to originate from this object. This object has a large south pole basin named Rheasilvia. It has a
basaltic crust and since it has a differentiated structure some have argued that geologically it is a small
terrestrial planet. This object was visited in 2011 by the Dawn mission. For 10 points, name this member of
the asteroid belt whose mass is only eclipsed by Ceres.
ANSWER: 4 Vesta
This constellation gives its name to a large star stream interacting with the Milky Way galaxy, and its 70star contains one of the first extrasolar planets observed. This constellation contains the heart of the Local
Supercluster, and this constellation's W star gives its name to a class of Population II pulsating variables
also known as Type II Cepheus. Another object in this constellation is Messier 104, known as the
Sombrero Galaxy, which is not a part of the cluster found in this constellation. For ten points, name this
constellation with alpha star Spica.
ANSWER: Virgo [Accept the Virgin]
This constellation is the location of Ross 128. This is the second largest constellation in the night sky after
Hydra, and it is between Hydra and Bootes [BOO-tus]. It includes the binary star Porrima [por-REE-mah],
and its brightest star is Spica [SPIH-kah]. Markarian's Eyes are part of its galaxy cluster, which according
to some astronomers includes the Local Group and therefore the Milky Way. Name this constellation
between Leo and Libra that is associated with young women.
ANSWER: Virgo
Markarian's Chain is a collection of galaxies that lies within this constellation, and Giovanelli and Haynes
discovered an embryonic galaxy south of that cluster. Its mu star, Rijl al Awwa, represents one of the
figure's feet. Its beta star, Zavijava, was near the 1922 eclipse that confirmed Einstein's theory of general
relativity. Near the ecliptic, its alpha star is an ellipsoidal rotating variable binary system given a name
meaning "ear of wheat," Spica. For 10 points, name this member of the zodiac whose English translation
means "Virgin."
ANSWER: Virgo
Peebles derived a cosmic version of this theorem in order to find the peculiar velocity profiles of
groups of galaxies, and that theorem uses two- and three-point mass correlation functions. A
variational form of this theorem can be used to find the frequency of stable radial pulsations of a ball
of gas. n one famous application of this theorem, the Coma galaxy cluster was found to be 160 times
more massive than its luminosity would suggest, leading Zwicky to hypothesize the existence of dark
matter. This equation is derived by showing that one half of the time derivative of the moment of inertia
of a group of particles is equal to the sum over the dot product of each particles- position vector and
momentum vector.. For 10 points, name this theorem, which states that for a self-gravitating system, the
average kinetic energy is equal to negative one half times the average potential energy.
ANSWER: Virial theorem
This has been used to show that as a star radiates energy and contracts it heats up, rather than cooling down.
One derivation of this statement starts with the sum of the dot product of the positions and momentums of
all of the particles of a system, which is then differentiated over time. One result of this theorem is that in
systems governed by 1/r ["1 over r"] forces, the potential energy will always be zero or negative, and
Kepler's third law is essentially a special case of it. Related to one formulated by Clausius, for 10 points,
name this theorem that relates the time average of kinetic energy of a system to that of the total potential
energy.
ANSWER: virial theorem
This statement can be used in electrodynamics to suggest that all plasmoids expand if not limited by
external forces. Special relativity modifies this statement into defining an interval rather than a fixed
value. For gravitational and electrostatic systems, this statement reduces to Lagrange's identity. This
statement is derived by finding one-half of the time derivative of the moment of inertia, then taking
the time (*) average of the time derivative of this value. A common assumption related to this theorem is
that systems are stably bound. With systems involving potential energy, it reduces to the statement that the
total average of 2K is equal to n times the total average of V. For 10 points, name this mechanical theorem
that relates the average kinetic and potential energies of a mechanical system.
ANSWER: Virial theorem
In the measurement of this property, Taylor vortices are eliminated in "Cup and bob" instruments, and for
ideal gases, this quantity scales with the three-halves power of relative temperature. It is related to thermal
diffusivity by the Prandtl number. The drag force on a body is proportional to this quantity, the body's
radius, and its velocity according to the Stokes law. Another form of this quantity is equal to the ration of
the shear stress and the shear velocity, and the Reynolds number is inversely proportional to this quantity.
Fluids for which this property is constant are called Newtonian. For 10 points, identify this property of
fluids which describes their ability to resist flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
This quantity is given by the VFT equation for amorphous materials near the glass transition temperature.
One form of this quantity, equal to the slope of a plot of shear stress against the rate of shear strain, is the
constant of proportionality between the shear stress between layers and the perpendicular velocity gradient.
This quantity is constant for Newtonian fluids. For 10 points, name this quantity, which measures a fluid's
resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
Thixotropic materials are time dependent upon this quantity that is the subject of the Reynolds
Number and the Navier-tokes Equation has a zero value for it when it is the Euler Equation. Dividing
shear stress and shear strain and mass density yields this quantitiy. For ten points, name this physical
quantity, measured in poises, that determines the laminarity or turbulence of flow, the resistance of a fluid to
flow at low speeds.
ANSWER: Viscosity
A Refutas equation can be used to calculate this quantity for a mixture, and one form of it is the
numerator of the Prandtl number. The ratio of buoyant force to the force caused by it is given as the
Grashof number. This property is increased when rheopectic substances are agitated, while it is
reduced for (*) thixotropic compounds. It can be measured using a Zahn cup, and its kinematic form can
be calculated by dividing its absolute form by mass density. This property can be characterized by a
Reynolds number, and it is constant for Newtonian fluids and zero for superfluids. For ten points, identify
this measure of a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity or viscous force
The kinematic form of this quantity is equal to the dynamic form divided by density. The effects of
this property are most significant in the boundary layer. This quantity depends on the magnitude or
duration of the shear stress in (*) non-Newtonian materials. The ratio of inertial forces to this property's
forces is known as the Reynold's number. This quantity is equal to the shear stress divided by the shear
strain and is constant for Newtonian fluids. For 10 points, name this property defined as a fluid's resistance
to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
One form of this property is divided by thermal diffusivity in expression of the Prandtl number. When this
property's value equals zero, the Navier-Stokes equations simplify into Euler's equations, and the Reynolds
number is the ratio of inertial forces to this property. Its kinematic variety is measured in stokes, while its
dynamic variety is measured in poise. Newtonian fluids have a constant value of, for 10 points, what
measure of a fluid's resistance to flow?
ANSWER: viscosity
This quantity increases as the shear rate increases in dilatant materials. In thixotropic materials, this
quantity decreases over time when shear stress is constant. The dynamic form of this quantity,
written mu or eta, is defined by the equation shear stress equals mu times the velocity gradient.
When helium-4 is cooled below the lambda point it acquires a value of zero for this quantity, which is
equal to zero for all superfluids. It is constant for a (*) Newtonian fluid and the ratio of inertial forces to
those related to this property is called the Reynolds number. For 10 points name this quantity that represents
a liquid's resistance to deformation.
ANSWER: viscosity
Removing terms describing this quantity in the Navier-Stokes equations reduces them to Euler's equations,
and Trouton's ratio is equal to the ratio of this quantity's extensional and shear versions. It may be
measured with a Zahn cup or a rheometer. The Reynolds number is inversely proportional to this quantity,
which decreases when a thixotopic material is put under stress. It has dynamic and kinematic varieties,
which may be measured in poise and Stokes, respectively. Its reciprocal is fluidity, and it is equal to the
ratio of shear stress to shear velocity. For ten points, name this quantity which is constant for Newtonian
fluids, the resistance of a fluid to relative stress.
ANSWER: viscosity
Mobility is related to the zeta potential, dielectric constant, and this quantity in the Smoluchowski equation.
For gases, the variation of this quantity with temperature is given by Sutherland's formula. Measured with a
Zahn cup, this quantity is squared in the Grashof number, and the ratio of this quantity to thermal diffusivity
is the Prandtl number. When this quantity is zero, the Euler equations correspond to the Navier-Stokes
equations. Reynolds number is the ratio of inertial forces to this quantity, which is constant for Newtonian
fluids. Measured in poise [PWAHZ], this quantity is zero for superfluids. For 10 points, name this internal
friction of a fluid that tends to resist its flow.
ANSWER: viscosity [accept viscous forces and other equivalents]
One form of this quantity over the rate of thermal diffusivity is the Prandtl number, and Sutherland's
formula calculates this quantity for an ideal gas as a function of temperature. The Navier-Stokes equations
reduce to the Euler equations when heat conduction and this quantity are zero. It is independent of stress for
Newtonian fluids, and the ratio of the inertial forces to the forces caused by this property is known as the
Reynolds number. This quantity's kinematic form is found by dividing its dynamic form by the substance's
density. This quantity, which is zero in superfluids, contributes to turbulence when decreased. For 10 points,
name this quantity, a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity [prompt on "eta" or "mu"]
The unit commonly used to measure this quantity equals one-tenth of a pascal-second. The kinematic
form of this quantity, found by dividing the more common form by density, can be measured in
square centimeters per second, which is a stokes. That more common form of this quantity, the
dynamic type, equals shearing stress divided by velocity gradient. Though this quantity measured in
poise [pwahz] can apply to gases, it is more applicable to liquids that are not inviscid [in-VIH-sid].
Name this quantity high in syrup and other liquids called "thick", a measure of resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity [do not accept word forms]
The square of this quantity is inversely proportional to the Grashof number, and when this quantity is
zero, the Navier-Stokes equations reduce to the Euler equations. The Reynolds number is inversely
proportional to this quantity, and this value is constant for Newtonian fluids. This quantity comes in
kinematic and dynamic varieties, the latter of which is measured in poise. For 10 points, identify this
quantity which is the ratio of shear stress to shear velocity, the measure of a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
Division of this quantity by thermal diffusivity gives the Prandtl number. When this property equals
zero for a substance, the Navier-Stokes equations simplify to Euler's equations. The ratio of inertial
forces to this kind of force is given by the [*] Reynolds number, which implies turbulence at high values.
Its kinematic variety is measured in stokes while its dynamic variety is measured in poise. Assumed to be
constant for Newtonian fluids, this is, for 10 points, what measure of a fluid's resistance to flow?
ANSWER: viscosity
One method for solving for thermodynamic pressure utilizes a constant of proportionality named after the
"volume" or "bulk" version of this property. This property is zero in Euler's fluid equations and the Prandtl
number is given as the kinematic version of this property over thermal diffusivity. This property's kinematic
version is also a parameter in the Navier-Stokes equations and there is also a dynamic version of it. Below
the lambda point, helium fluids possess a value of zero for this quantity, as they become superfluids. For 10
points, name this property, which quantifies a fluid's internal resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
This quantity can be expressed in units of Saybolt Universal Seconds. One form of this quantity is
the proportionality constant between shear stress and sheer rate; the other form of this quantity is
just
the first form divided by density. Those forms are the "dynamic" and (*) "kinematic" types. By
Stokes-
Law, this quantity is multiplied by six pi, velocity, and diameter to find the drag force on a sphere. It is
measured in Poise or Stokes. For 10 points, give this measure of a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
The Prandtl (PRANT-ul) number is the ratio of a type of this to thermal diffusivity. Poiseuille's
(pwuh-SELLZ) equation states that the pressure drop is proportional to this quantity. Six pi times the radius
of a spherical object times its speed times this quantity gives the drag force by Stoke's Law. The ratio of
inertial forces to forces due to this is given by the Reynold's number. Newtonian fluids have a constant
value for this. For 10 points, name this measure of the internal friction of a fluid.
ANSWER: viscosity
Instruments called rheometers measure this force. Isaac Newton stated this force times the velocity
gradient in the perpendicular direction equals the shear stress. Stokes law contains a term equal to
six pi times this force times a sphere's radius times its velocity. This force is accounted for in the
denominator of Reynolds number and is variable in non-Newtonian fluids. There are dynamic and
kinematic forms of this property; the dynamic form is expressed as mass divided by length multiplied by
time, where one Pascal second is equal to ten poise. For 10 points, name this force that describes a fluid's
resistance to movement
ANSWER: viscosity or viscous force
This property can be measured using a Zahn cup, and for special cases, shear stress can be calculated as the
product of shear strain and this property. Measuring this is the goal of the pitch drop experiment, and one
unit this quantity is measured in is poise. Stokes- law gives drag force for a spherical object as six pi times
radius times velocity times this property, and the Reynolds number is the ratio of inertial forces to forces
caused by this. This property has a constant value for Newtonian fluids, and it exists in kinematic and
dynamic forms. For 10 points, name this term for a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: Viscosity
This quantity is equal to zero in a system of trapped exciton-polaritons. This quantity is reduced
in a thixotropic material when the material is stressed. The ratio of inertial forces to forces caused by
this quantity is known as the Reynolds number. This quantity is zero below the lambda point when
Helium becomes a (*) superfluid. When the shear rate does not affect this quantity a fluid is
Non-Newtonian. For 10 points, name this quantity that is a measure of a fluid's resistance to deformation.
ANSWER: viscosity
James Maxwell carried out extensive research concerning how gases maintain this property in closed
systems, concluding that an increase in pressure does not affect it. Microscale approximations
detailing the motion of oceanic currents have been measured in terms of the "eddy" type of this
property. A more common manifestation of this property can be seen in the comparison of molasses
to water, which has drastically less internal friction. For 10 points, identify this term denoting the resistance
of a fluid to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
For a dilute gas, this quantity can be estimated using the Chapman-Enskog equation. This quantity's
namesake friction coefficient can be found using Stokes formula. Amorphous solids such as glass have
similar properties to liquids with very high values for this quantity. The kinematic form of this quantity is
equal to its general form divided by the density. This quantity decreases when thixotropic fluids are
disturbed, but it is constant for Newtonian fluids. For 10 points, name this term that describes a liquid's
resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
The Prandtl number is the ratio of this quantity to thermal diffusivity. Euler's equation is used if this
quantity is assumed to be negligible, and it can be measured in either stokes or poise. The Reynolds
number is equal to the ratio of inertial forces to forces attributable to it. The kinetic type is equal to the
dynamic type divided by the density, and this quantity is constant in Newtonian fluids. For 10 points,
give this term for a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity [accept kinetic viscosity before "poise"]
The so-called "thixo" index is derived by measuring this property at different shear rates. One
form of this property is the coefficient of proportionality between shear stress and the velocity
gradient. By Stokes's Law, the drag force on a sphere is equal to six pi times the sphere's diameter
times its velocity times this property of the fluid. (*) Newtonian fluids have a constant value for this
property, which comes in dynamic and kinematic forms. For 10 points, name this resistance of a fluid to
flow.
ANSWER: viscosity [prompt on mu; prompt on nu]
This quantity for a dilute gas is proportional to the square root of molecular mass times temperature by a
Chapman-Enskog equation. For an ideal gas it can be calculated by temperature to the three-halves power
divided by temperature plus a constant; that equation is Sutherland's equation. For an amorphous material,
this quantity is thermally activated. This quantity increases when rheopectic liquids are agitated, and it
decreases when thixotropic liquids are agitated. It is in the denominator of the definition of the Reynolds
number, and Newtonian fluids have a constant value for this quantity. Name this quantity, measured in
poise, for which superfluids have a value of 0.
ANSWER: viscosity
Substances lacking this property can create Rollin films. This property can be described as the amount of
resistance to deformation when shear stress is applied, and there are dynamic and kinematic forms of it. The
Reynolds number is ratio of inertial forces to forces that are caused by this quantity, which is symbolized as
eta. Superfluids lack this property, while values for it are written in the units kilograms per meter cubed. For
10 points, name this property of liquids to resist flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
This quantity is measured by calculating the torque required to completely revolve a submerged
spindle in a rheometer. For a plate atop a fluid, this quantity is the proportionality constant between
the shear stress and the shear velocity. Water has a value of (*) 1.002 centipoise for this quantity, which
can be dynamic or kinematic, and which goes to zero in a superfluid. For 10 points, name this internal
resistance of a fluid to flow, which is very high for honey.
ANSWER: viscosity [or dynamic viscosity; or kinematic viscosity]
Sutherland's formula gives this quantity for ideal gases, and like thermal conductivity, it can be found by
applying Green-Kubo relations to the Navier-Stokes transport coefficients. Euler's fluid equations assume a
zero value for this quantity, and the Grashof number is inversely proportional to its square. The no-slip
condition generally exacerbates its effects, and it has dynamic and kinematic varieties. The Reynolds
number is inversely proportional to this quantity, and it is constant for Newtonian fluids. For 10 points,
identify this quantity, the ratio of shear stress to shear velocity, used as a measure of a fluid's resistance to
flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
For an ideal gas, this quantity is proportional to temperature raised to the three-halves power divided by
temperature plus a constant. This quantity jumps from zero to non-zero when entering the boundary layer.
In substances where it is only a function of temperature, the shear stress is equal to this quantity times the
first derivative of the velocity profile with respect to a change in position perpendicular to the direction of
shear. The velocity times a characteristic length divided by the kinematic form of this quantity equals the
Reynolds number. Newtonian fluids have constant value of, for 10 points, what measure of a fluid's
resistance to flow?
ANSWER: viscosity [accept dynamic viscosity until "kinematic," do not accept "kinematic viscosity"]
For an ideal gas, this quantity can be derived from temperature using Sutherland's formula. This quantity
can be mathematically represented by tensors of fourth or higher orders. Bingham plastics can experience a
dramatic increase in this property at high stresses, though at low stresses it instead is characterized by an
amalgamation of this term and "elastic." Thixotropic and rheopectic materials respectively decrease and
increase this property over time, much like the processes of shear thinning and shear thickening. This value
is non-constant for non-Newtonian fluids, such as blood and ketchup. Analogous to friction, for 10 points,
identify this term for a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
The Navier-Stokes equations can be simplified into the Euler (OY-lur) equations by setting heat conduction
and this quantity both equal to zero. Fluids for which this quantity is the same at every point are called
Newtonian. One type of this quantity is sometimes called the diffusivity of momentum, while the other
equals the ratio of shear stress to the rate of strain. It can be measured in pascal-seconds, which are called
poise (PWAHS), or in stokes; those types are the kinematic and dynamic, respectively. Absent in
superfluids, name this property of fluids akin to friction in solids.
ANSWER: viscosity [accept modifier of "dynamic" or "kinematic" before both have been mentioned]
This quantity is measured using devices named for Staubinger and Stormer, and calculating it was
the goal of the pitch drop experiment. Its variation with temperature for an ideal gas is estimated by
Sutherland's equation, and the Grashof (*) number is proportional to its inverse square. Its kinematic
form is computed by dividing the "dynamic" form by the material density, and this quantity is frequently
measured in centipoise and is constant for Newtonian fluids. Defined as the ratio between shear stress and
rate of strain, for 10 points, name this quantity that measures a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
Austin Angell used the behaviour of this quantity near the glass transition to classify materials as "strong" or
"fragile;" this quantity for materials at that temperature is oftem modeled well by the Vogel-TammannFulcher equation. The kinematic variety of this is sometimes measured in Saybolt Universal seconds in the
petroleum industry, its unit in cgs is the poise, and devices which measure it are called rheometers. Liquids
in which this is non-constant are called non-Newtonian, which can undergo shear stress. For 10 points,
name this term for how much a liquid resists deformation.
ANSWER: viscosity
For a dilute gas, this quantity is proportional to the square root of the product of mass and
temperature, divided by collision diameter squared times the collision integral. This quantity scales
from a reference temperature, for an ideal gas, as the square root of temperature. Those results are
the Chapman-Enskog equation and Sutherland's formula. This quantity varies over time in thixotropic
materials and with applied shear in shear-thinning materials. This quantity, the ratio of shear stress to shear
velocity, is zero for Newtonian fluids, and superfluidity occurs when this quantity is zero. For 10 points,
name this property of fluids, which measures resistance to flow?
ANSWER: viscosity
A so-called bulk or second variety of this property exists, but is unimportant in the incompressible case.
This property can decrease over time in response to applied shear, a phenomenon known as thixotropy.
This quantity appears multiplying the axial length and volumentric flow rate in the usual form of
Poiseuille's equation. The effects of this property dominate at low Reynolds' numbers as this quantity is the
denominator of the Reynolds number. This quantity appears as the constant of proportionality between the
sheer stress and perpendicular velocity gradient for a Newtonian fluid. This property increases with
temperature for gases but decreases for liquids; relatedly, for a superfluid below the lambda point, this
property has a value of zero. For 10 points, name this measure of a fluid's internal resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
Euler's fluid equations assume that this quantity is zero, and the Reynolds number is inversely
proportional to this quantity. Its kinematic form is found by dividing its dynamic form by density, and those
forms of this quantity are respectively measured in stokes and poise. This quantity is constant for
Newtonian fluids, and foods which have a high value for this quantity include mayonnaise and syrup. For
10 points, identify this quantity which measures a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
For an ideal gas, the temperature dependence of this quantity can be calculated with Sutherland's
formula, and it usually appears along with the length and a factor of 8 in the denominator of
Poiseuille's equation. Often measured with a Zahn cup, its kinematic form is found by dividing its
dynamic form by the density. It is found as the ratio of shear stress to velocity gradient in Newtonian
fluids, for which this quantity remains constant. For 10 points, name this fluid property measured in poise,
often defined as the resistance of a material to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
This quantity is squared in the denominator of the Grashof number, and can be measured using a Zahn cup.
The kinematic type of this quantity is equal to the dynamic type divided by density. The frictional force a
spherical object experiences is proportional to this quantity, the radius, and the velocity by Stokes' law. This
quantity decreases for thixotropic materials when a shear stress is applied. This quantity is constant for
Newtonian fluids, and is zero for superfluids. For 10 points, name this quantity that is large for fluids that
resist flowing, such as molasses.
ANSWER: viscosity
Time independent forms of this quantity can be modeled as a power law with the Ostwald-de Waele
equation, where n greater than one means the material is dilatant. This quantity is large when
convective acceleration can be neglected, allowing Stokes's law to be applied to a spherical object.
For a dilute gas, this quantity is proportional to the square root of temperature in a theory named for
Chapman and Enskog. This quantity can be measured with a Zahn cup in one industry, and in units
of Saybolt Universal Seconds in the petroleum industry. Its (*) kinematic form is equal to its dynamic
form divided by its density. Body armor has a unique shear thickening form of this quantity, because in
non-Newtonian materials this quantity changes with applied stress. Stokes law gives the drag associated
with this quantity. For 10 points, name this property of a fluid that describes resistance to flow.
ANSWER: Viscosity
According to kinetic theory, this quantity equals the thermal conductivity times two-thirds
times mass over Boltzmann's constant, which makes it scale with the square root of mass times
temperature. The normal stress on a control volume includes a term equal to two-thirds this
quantity, times the divergence of velocity. The Laplacian of velocity is multiplied by a tensor
representing this quantity in the Navier-Stokes equations. A non-zero value for this quantity
leads to the no-slip condition in boundary layers. This quantity is the slope of a graph plotting
shear stress against strain rate; consequentially, it decreases at increasing shear stress for dilatant
fluids. It is in the denominator of the Reynolds number. It's constant for Newtonian fluids. For 10
points, name this quantity measured in centipoise, which is roughly the fluid's resistance toward
flowing.
ANSWER: viscosity [or kinematic viscosity; or dynamic viscosity]
The Chapman-Enskog equation can be used to estimate it for dilute gases while temperature's effect on it in
an ideal gas can be given by Sutherland's formula. The ratio of buoyant forces to this is known as the
Grashof number, while the ratio of inertial forces to this is known as Reynold's number. The equation for
Reynold's number uses the dynamic variety of it, and this property also comes in a kinematic variety. The
study of it is known as rheology, and it can be measured using a Zahn cap. Measured in units of stokes and
poise and constant for Newtonian fluids is, FTP, what measure of a fluid's resistance to flow?
ANSWER: Viscosity
One type of this quantity is related to thermal diffusivity by the Prandtl (PRAN-tul) number. Increased
by the "no-slip condition," this quantity is measured in poise (PWAHZ). The ratio of inertial forces and
this quantity gives the Reynolds number. A decrease in its magnitude causes turbulence, and it is not
observed in superfluids. For 10 points, give this term for a fluid's resistance to flow.
ANSWER: viscosity
This unit is equivalent to a weber per second, which is useful in analyzing Faraday's law of induction or
what happens to a field when magnetic flux is reduced at a weber per second. This is also equivalent to a
henry ampere per second, which can be used to analyze the impact of an inductor. This unit is also
equivalent to a Newton meter per coulomb, which is helpful when calculating the amount of work done by
an electric field, which is commonly measured as this unit per meter. Name this unit which by Ohm's Law
equals an ampere times an ohm and which is used to measure the difference in electric potential.
ANSWER: volt
His student Configliachi submitted this man's memoirs to a competition to defame Aldini. Pancaldi
focused on his invention that stored static electricity to charge Leyden jars, the perpetual
electrophorous, and Wollaston demonstrated oxidation of the electrode in this man's namesake device
consisting of layered copper and dampened cloth on zinc. That "pile" followed a competitor's theory of
"animal electricity." For 10 points, name this Italian inventor of the first battery, a friend of Luigi Galvani
and namesake of a unit for electric potential.
ANSWER: Alesandro Volta
The exact value for the unit measuring this quantity is defined based on the Josephson Effect, and
this quantity squared is equal to power times resistance. This quantity is equal to electric field
strength times distance, and Wheatstone Bridges work because this quantity is the same across all (*)
loops in a parallel circuit. Kirchoff's Loop Rule claims that this quantity sums to zero around a circuit,
which makes sense because any two points connected by a wire have the same value of this. For ten points,
what is this term for the potential difference between two points, which is often used to measure the strength
of batteries?
ANSWER: Voltage
This quantity in the Josephson effect is proportional to the time derivative of the phase difference. This
quantity is defined as the line integral of "E dot ds," and the electric field is perpendicular to this quantity's
contour lines. The sum of this quantity around a closed loop equals zero, according to Kirchhoff's loop rule.
This quantity is equal for any two components connected in parallel. Capacitance equals charge divided by
this quantity, which equals current times resistance, according to Ohm's law. For 10 points, name this
quantity that equals 1.5 for a double-A battery.
ANSWER: voltage or electrical potential difference [do not accept "electrical potential"]
This quantity is the negative line integral of electric field between two points. Its corresponding unit is
Joules per Coulomb. Its sum around any closed loop in a circuit must be zero. The change in this quantity
across a resistor equals the current times the resistance by Ohm's Law. For 10 points, name this quantity
also known as electric potential difference, which is supplied by batteries.
ANSWER: voltage [or voltage drop; or electric potential difference until it is read; do not accept or prompt on "potential energy"]
Thevenin's theorem allows one to reduce a complex circuit to one with just a resistor and this type
of source in series. A "divider" of this quantity can be constructed using resistors in series. The sum
of this quantity around a loop is zero according to one of Kirchhoff's laws. For two resistors with
different resistances in parallel, this quantity is the (*) same, and this quantity is measured across circuit
elements. For 10 points, name this quantity that is equal to current times resistance according to Ohm's law.
ANSWER: voltage [or electric potential difference]
This quantity is plotted on the y-axis of an Evans diagram. One common standard for this quantity
uses a potassium chloride solution and mercury (I) chloride, a substance known as calomel. The
difference in the experimentally observed and thermodynamically calculated values of this quantity is
proportional to the log of the current density divided by the exchange current density. This quantity
is equal to change in (*) Gibbs free energy divided by the product of the number of moles of electrons and
the Faraday constant. This quantity at some temperature is equal to this quantity at standard conditions
minus R T over n F times the natural log of the reaction quotient. For 10 points, name this quantity
determined by the Nernst equation, which measures the strength of reaction in an electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: voltage or electric scalar potential [accept more specific answers like "standard electrode potential," or "reduction potential," do not accept "overpotential"]
The Laplacian of an electric potential field is equal to the negative free charge density over this quantity.
This quantity is equal to the negative time derivative of the magnetic flux, and in an inductor, it is
equivalent to the inductance multiplied by the negative time derivative of the current. It is classically
defined as Coulomb's constant multiplied by the sum of charge over distance, and also as the line integral of
the electric field "dot dl." When it is multiplied by current, it gives power dissipated by a resistor.
Kirchoff's Loop Rule states that the sum of this value around a loop in a circuit is zero. Name this quantity
this is equal to the current times resistance by Ohm's Law.
ANSWER: voltage [accept electric potential difference, emf, and electromotive force, do not accept anything having to do with potential energy]
Op-amps convert a small amount of this quantity into a larger amount of it. In an inductor, it equals the
inductance times the time derivative of current. In circuit diagrams, sources of one form of this quantity are
represented by a short line adjacent and parallel to a longer line. The integral form of Faraday's law
determines the amount of this quantity generated by changing magnetic flux. When the E-field is
irrotational, or conservative, its negative gradient is the electric field. For 10 points, name this quantity
which measures electric potential energy per unit charge, and which is related to current and resistance by
Ohm's law.
ANSWER: voltage [or scalar potential; or electric potential or electrostatic potential before "electric potential energy" is read; accept emf or electromotive force; prompt on "potential" or "potential difference" before "electric potential energy" is read]
This quantity is equal to the dot product of electric field and displacement, and the change in this quantity
around a loop is equal to zero according to Kirchhoff's laws. The power of a resistor is equal to the square
of this quantity divided by resistance, and this quantity is constant for resistors wired in parallel. Referred
to as the electromotive force when generated by a battery, For 10 points, name this quantity which,
according to Ohm's law, is the product of current and resistance.
ANSWER: Voltage
Faraday's law states this quantity is proportional to the negative time derivative of magnetic flux.
Transformers change it by forming two coils with different numbers of loops. The rate of change
over space of this quantity is the electric field, and it is thus constant inside conductors. When
generated by a battery or magnetic field, this quantity is called (*) "electromotive force." Ohm's law
states it is equal to current times resistance. For 10 points, name this difference in electric potential named
for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: voltage [or emf before "electromotive force"; or electromotive force until mentioned; or electric potential difference before mentioned]
The Laplacian of this quantity is equal to minus the charge density divided by the permittivity of free space.
In one system, this quantity is equal to the current times the magnetic field divided by the product of the
plate thickness, electron charge, and density of mobile charges. That kind of this quantity arises due to a
magnetic field perpendicular to an electric current in the Hall effect. Transformers can step-up or step-down
this quantity, which is proportional to the time derivative of the current for an inductor and to the charge
stored for a capacitor. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as the electric potential energy per unit
charge and equal to the current times the resistance by Ohm's Law.
ANSWER: voltage [accept electric potential, accept any answers referring to a change in voltage or a voltage drop]
This quantity is equal to the line integral of the electric field, and on a Josephson junction made of two
superconductors coupled by a weak link, current flows indefinitely without this quantity being applied. At
the tip of an antenna, this quantity becomes extremely high, which is caused by the impedance approaching
infinity. The electric field is perpendicular to the contour lines of this quantity, and around a closed loop,
the sum of this quantity is equal to zero. This quantity is known as electromotive force when produced by a
battery. For 10 points, name this quantity which, according to Ohm's Law, is equal to current times
resistance.
ANSWER: Voltage [accept Electric Potential Difference]
A change in magnetic flux generates this quantity according to Faraday's law, and electric field is the
negative partial derivative of this quantity with respect to x. An oscilloscope plots this quantity with respect
to time, and Kirchoff's laws state that the net change in it around a loop in a circuit must be zero. Measuring
this in a circuit requires an instrument with a very high resistance connected in parallel. For a point charge it
is proportional to charge over radius, and it can also be referred to as potential difference. For 10 points,
name this term used for work per unit charge, often symbolized V.
ANSWER: Voltage [accept Electric Potential Difference before mention; accept EMF or Electromotiv Force before "derivative"]
The growth of these objects ceases in the Kutta condition. Hemholtz developed a series of theorems
summarizing the properties of three dimensional ones. At low Mach numbers, they are the sole
source of aeroacoustic (*) sound. A staggered row of these structures named after von Karman develop in
the oscillating wake behind a cylinder when the Reynolds number exceeds 40. For 10 points, name these
fluid regions that are not present in potential flow and are characterized by a high concentration of vorticity.
ANSWER: vortices (or vortex)
The Strouhal number governs flow that arises due to these phenomena. Helmholtz is the namesake of
three theorems that concern the physical shape of these objects, and when these objects possess no
shear factor, their equation of motion shows that all points in them possess the same angular velocity.
Theodore von Karman is the namesake of a sheet that shows how these objects can induce motion in fluids.
For 10 points, name this phenomenon that is the namesake of a characteristic measured by taking the curl of
the velocity of a fluid or taking circulation and dividing it by area, a fluid phenomenon that swirls.
ANSWER: vortex [or vorticity]
The square of this quantity is known as the enstrophy and is used as a diagnostic variable in many
atmospheric codes. This quantity appears as the analogue of current in the fluid analogue of the Biot-Savart
law. In order for Bernoulli's equation to apply, a fluid must have a value of zero for this quantity. For a
force-free fluid, the Reynolds transport equation for this quantity has as inhomogeneous term given by the
cross product of the pressure gradient with itself over the density squared plus the curl of the divergence of
the viscous stress tensor over the density; that equation represents conservation of angular momentum in a
fluid. For 10 points, name this fluid quantity that is equal to the curl of the velocity field and that represents
the local circulation rate.
ANSWER: the vorticity [prompt on rot, omega, or circulation]
Both geostrophic advection and the convergence or divergence of a column of air are the only means of
changing this quantity within a quasi-geostrophic atmosphere, according to a namesake equation, which
along with the height, thermodynamic, and omega equations, defines QG theory. Stommel proposed that the
absolute form of this quantity is conserved in ocean basins, accounting for the strength and narrowness of
western boundary currents, while in the atmosphere, positive advection of this quantity is typically found
downstream from troughs and is associated with rising motion. By Stokes- theorem, the integral of the
normal component of this quantity over an area is equal to circulation around a loop, and it can also be
defined as the curl of a velocity vector. For 10 points, name this quantity in fluid dynamics, a measure of
rotation about an axis.
ANSWER: vorticity
Grobli first solved the integrable problem of three of these objects. Conservation of mass along with
Kelvin's theorem and Helmholtz's three theorems regarding these are used to describe their
stretching. Taylor and Green names one of these objects which was used to study turbulence and
which is an exact solution of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation. When the Reynolds number
exceeds 80, these objects are periodically (*) generated during viscous incompressible flow around a
cylinder. In addition to being the focus of the von Karman street, these objects are the namesake of a
quantity defined as the curl of velocity. Examples of these objects include smoke rings and tornadoes. For
10 points, name these objects that feature fluid swirling around a center.
ANSWER: vortex [accept vortices]
This person connected two pistons to a single beam in a system used in automobile suspensions known as
his linkage. He also added a separate condensation chamber to a Newcomen engine in order to improve
efficiency. He devised the horsepower unit, which now equals about 750 times the unit named after him.
Name this improver of the steam engine whose namesake unit of power equals a Joule per second.
ANSWER: James Watt
The "square" and "triangle" types of these entities only contain odd harmonics. These things have
an associated phase and group velocity. These entities can superimpose in "constructive" or
"destructive" interference. When they remain in a constant position, they are known as (*)
"standing." One can obtain their namesake length by measuring the distance between successive crests and
troughs. For 10 points, identify these oscillations that transfer energy.
ANSWER: waves
Projects such as VIRGO, LISA, and LIGA are looking for the gravitational kind of these phenomena.
The frequency of these phenomena decreases as their source moves towards an observer in the Doppler
Effect. They can be classified as transverse or longitudinal, and the theory that light functions as one of
these phenomena was advanced by Thomas Young's double-slit experiment. de Broglie (duh BROY)'s
principle of duality states that light acts as both particles and these phenomena. For 10 points, name these
phenomena in which vibrational energy is transmitted through space and time, examples of which includes
"micro" ones used in a food-cooking device?
ANSWER: waves
One type of these entities is described by the KdV-Burgers equation. An infinite length string is
assumed in d'Alembert's solution describing this physical phenomena. One self-reinforcing self reinforcing
subtype are solitons. In one case, their velocity is equal to the square root of tension over density. Functions
of these are solutions to Schrodinger's equation. Important characteristics of them include their namesake
number, phase, and amplitude. For 10 points, name these periodic disturbances examples of which include
light and sound.
ANSWER: waves
One experiment that seeks to detect one form of these uses two observatories spaced 3000 kilometers apart
to detect motion in an interferometer. That experiment is LIGO. An experiment that scattered electrons off a
nickel crystal showed that electrons exhibit some properties of these phenomena. That experiment was the
Davisson-Germer experiment, which confirmed an idea first put forth by de Broglie that matter has
properties of particles and these. Young's double-slit experiment produced an interference pattern,
demonstrating that light is one of these. For 10 points, name these periodic disturbances that can be
transverse, like light, or longitudinal, like sound.
ANSWER: waves [accept gravitational waves; accept matter waves; accept de Broglie waves]
The equation governing these phenomena can usually be written as the d'Alembertian of a field being
equal to zero, and "packets" of these phenomena obey the Fourier uncertainty principle. In
dispersive media, their phase and group velocities may differ, and in moving media they undergo the
(*) Doppler effect. Nodes and antinodes are seen in their "standing" variety, and depending on their mode
of propagation, they may be longitudinal or transverse. Traveling ones move at a speed equal to the product
of their namesake length and their frequency. For 10 points, name these phenomena, such as light or sound.
ANSWER: waves (accept electromagnetic waves before "nodes" is read)
The defining equation named for these things is conventionally written "u sub tt equals c times u sub xx".
These things can be bounded by envelopes and may have distinct group and phase velocities. The behavior
of these things at a barrier is characterized by transmission and reflection coefficients. When these things
are spatially localized, they are called "packets". Those that propagate transversely may possess
polarization. De Broglie showed that particles have properties of these things. For 10 points, name these
things that are generically oscillatory motions, typically characterized by an amplitude and a frequency.
ANSWER: waves [or waveforms; prompt on "oscillations" or word forms]
One of these begins with a circular motion and is named for Rayleigh, while the fastest type is a horizontal
movement named for the mathematician A.E.H. Love. De Broglie proposed a model in place of rays for
light involving these. In addition to the above types of the surface variety, body ones include the
compressional type, which are followed by secondary or S ones. Another common representation uses the
transverse, as opposed to the longitudinal, variety. FTP, name this disturbance of a medium measured in
seismology, the method of propagation for sound.
ANSWER: Waves [Accept Seismic Waves until "longitudinal"]
When the squares of visibility and distinguishability are shown to be less than one, this theory can be
proven by the Englert-Greenberger relation. The existence of Arago spots for large molecules proves this,
and in 1999, it was proven for C60 fullerenes. This was accidentally proven for electrons when they were
fired at a nickel target in the Davisson-Germer experiment. The de Broglie wavelength is a mathematical
description of this idea, while the double-slit experiment and the photoelectric effect give seemingly
different results that are resolved by this. Name this theory that matter exhibits the properties of both the
namesake phenomena.
ANSWER: wave-particle duality [accept equivalents, prompt on "de Broglie hypothesis" until "wavelength"]
Both implications of this concept are considered under Niels Bohr's complementarity principle. This
concept explains the result of an experiment in which electrons fired at a nickel crystal had a scattering
pattern consistent with Bragg's law. This concept, which was confirmed by the Davisson-Germer
experiment and generalized to all matter by de Broglie, accounts for the distinct ways that light behaves.
For 10 points, name this concept through which quantum-scale objects exhibit properties of both
oscillations and single points of matter.
ANSWER: wave-particle duality [accept wave nature of electrons or any answer indicating that matter acts like a particle and a wave; accept de Broglie hypothesis before "de Broglie"]
Marcus theory states that the Arrhenius equation's pre-exponential factor can be derived from the
overlap of this quantity between donor and acceptor states, while this quantity's "leakage" into the
bandgap is responsible for the Franz-Keldysh effect. The time-independent version of the KleinGordon equation states that its Laplacian minus its product with m squared c squared over h-bar
squared is equal to zero, and for a many-body system it is assumed to be the product of several singlebody ones in the Hartree-Fock. Its magnitude squared at a particular point gives the probability of finding a
particle at that point. More famously, its an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian with eigenvalue equal to the
total energy by the Schrodinger equation. Observers can collapse, for 10 points, this quantity denoted psi,
which maps the possible states of a system to complex numbers.
ANSWER: Wavefunction
In a multi-particle system, multiple orthonormal forms of this quantity are multiplied to compute the
Hartree product. For a particle described by the Klein-Gordon equation, this quantity's
d-Alembertian is equal to negative m squared c squared divided by h-bar squared times, this
quantity. This quantity is antisymmetric under fermion interchange. The Hamiltonian operator on this
function is proportional to this function's time derivative. Non-square-integrable examples of this function
are non-normalizable and thus non-physical. The square of the magnitude of this function represents a
probability density for the location of the particles it describes. For 10 points, name this function which is
the solution of the Schrodinger equation and which describes the state of a quantum particle.
ANSWER: wavefunction
For sigmatropic rearrangements, the rotation is governed by this quantity to ensure that the same signs are
aligned. In a "particle in a box" scenario, it is sinusoidal like for a free particle but vanishes at the walls.
The square of this quantity gives the probability distribution of a particle's location. The Copenhagen
interpretation argues that this quantity is no more than a theoretical constant. Solutions to the Schrodinger
equation show how this quantity changes over time. For 10 points, name this quantity, symbolized psi,
which can collapse upon observation.
ANSWER: wavefunction
One quantity derived from simple examples of these entities and used to build-up antisymmetric
complicated ones is the Slater determinant. Another quantity derived from them is known as the probability
current density and is the conserved current in the quantum continuity equation, which accords with the
Born interpretation of these constructs, which should be properly normalized so their integral of their square
is unity over all space. For 10 points, name these mathematical objects, the square of which are equal to
probability densities for the positions of particles and which can be found using the Schrodinger equation.
ANSWER: the wavefunctions [or state functions; or wave vectors; or state vectors; prompt on psi]
These functions can be defined by considering a scalar function equal to a ket on a Hilbert space.
The Born-Oppenheimer approximation decomposes this value as a product of an electronic and a
nuclear one. The square of the magnitude of this value gives the probability density function for a
given state. Fermions have antisymmetric ones and bosons have symmetric ones. These values are
eigenfunctions of the (*) Hamiltonian, meaning that they are solutions to the Schroedinger equation. Each
atomic orbital in the hydrogen atom corresponds to one of these, which collapses under measurement. For
10 points, name this value symbolized psi, which encodes the current state of a quantum mechanical
system.
ANSWER: wavefunction [or psi before mention]
If the overlap integral for these quantities is large, then these quantities are thought to look alike. Spin has
half integer values for particles when these quantities are antisymmetric under interchange. Measurement of
observables causes its reduction to the eigenfunction of the observed eigenvalue. One equation regarding
these entities relates their Hamiltonian to their time derivative. Max Born suggested that squaring this
quantity represent the probability distribution, which was the founding principle of the Copenhagen
interpretation. In the Schrodinger equation, this quantity is the dependent variable. For 10 points, name
these entities that characterize a system in quantum mechanics, commonly symbolized psi.
ANSWER: wavefunctions
In the particle-in-a-box model, this quantity is equal to the sum of A sin k x plus B cos k x quantity times
e to the i omega t, and for the hydrogen atom model this quantity contains the product of a spherical
harmonic and a Laguerre polynomial. The norm of these quantities is necessarily equal to 1, and the square
of the magnitude of this quantity at any given state is the probability of the system existing at that state. In
one interpretation, observation of a system causes the eigenstates of this value to be replaced by a single
eigenstate. The Hamiltonian operator of this quantity is equal to the total energy of the system times this
quantity; that equation is named for Schrodinger. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized psi and used
to describe the state of a quantum mechanical system.
ANSWER: wavefunction
One method developed to approximate this entity is inversion of the Roothan equation, a method that is
itself an generalization of a technique to approximate this mathematical entity in which an N-linear function
of N of these entities evaluated at N different sets of coordinates is minimized via a variational principle.
The second aforementioned technique uses Slater determinants and is known as the self-consistent field
method or Hartree-Fock method. More generally, this mathematical object can often be understood as an
eigenvector of a Hamiltonian operator or as a superposition thereof. For 10 points, name this mathematical
object central to quantum mechanics, the dependent variable in the Schrodinger equation whose square
modulus gives the probability density for finding particles.
ANSWER: the wavefunction [or state function; prompt on psi; grudgingly accept energy until "these entities"]
One type of this quantity was introduced by Hugh Everett and is an important concept in the Many-Worlds
interpretation. In general, the units for this quantity can be given by one over length raised to the n/2 power
where n is the dimension the particle is in. Another equation related to it states that they total energy of a
system times this quantity is equal to the Hamiltonian of this quantity. That is the Schrodinger equation. For
10 points, name this quantity symbolized psi that describes the behavior and quantum state of a particle.
ANSWER: wavefunction
The shift in this quantity in one process is equal to h over mc times quantity one minus cosine theta, and
h over mc is often called the "Compton" type of it. For a particle in a box, it is equal to 2L over the
principal quantum number. Its observed value divided by its emitted value gives one plus the redshift. It
varies between 400 and 700 nanometers for visible light and is inversely proportional to the frequency. For
10 points, name this quantity, the distance between two peaks of a wave.
ANSWER: wavelength
The maximum angular resolution of an aperture is equal to 1.22 times this quantity over the diameter
of the aperture, according to the Rayleigh criterion. One type of this quantity is given by Planck's
constant over mass times the speed of light and represents the value for this quantity a particle would
have if it were a (*) photon. Bragg's law relates this quantity to lattice spacing and angle of incidence in Xray crystallography. Another type of this quantity that represents particle-wave duality in matter is equal to
Planck's constant divided by the momentum and is named for de Broglie. Speed of light over frequency is,
for 10 points, what quantity that represents the distance between the crests of a wave?
ANSWER: wavelength [prompt on lambda]
This quantity is inversely proportional to temperature by Wien's Law. The ratio of this quantity for light in
two different media is the reciprocal of the ratio of the media's indices of refraction. Planck's constant
divided by the product of mass and velocity is sometimes known as the "de Broglie" one. It is lower for
ultraviolet light than visible light and higher for infrared, and is typically denoted with the Greek letter
lambda. For 10 points, name this quantity, equal to the velocity divided by frequency, the distance between
two peaks of a periodic wave.
ANSWER: wavelength [accept lambda before it is read]
In the Fraunhofer equation for intensity, this quantity is in the denominator of the sine squared term. This
quantity times 1.22 equals the diameter of a lens times the sine of its angular resolution according to the
Rayleigh criterion. In a crystal, constructive interference occurs when twice the distance between atoms
times sine theta is an integer multiple of it, which is given by Bragg's law. Velocity is equal to the product
of frequency and this value, which is usually symbolized lambda. Equal to the distance between peaks of a
wave is, for 10 points, what quantity that equals about 400 to 750 nanometers for visible light?
ANSWER: wavelength
The cross-section for Rayleigh scattering is proportional to the inverse-fourth power of this quantity, and
Compton scattering results in a change of this quantity given by Planck's constant over the product of
electron mass and the speed of light, times one minus the cosine of scattering angle. This quantity increases
for photons climbing out of gravitational potential wells according to the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect, and
the ratio between the observed and emitted values for this quantity, minus one, defines the redshift. This
quantity increases for sound when the source of the sound is moving away from a stationary observer in the
Doppler effect. For 10 points, identify this quantity obtained by dividing velocity by frequency, which has
units of distance.
ANSWER: wavelength
According to the Rayleigh-Jeans (RAY-lee JEENS) law, spectral radiance varies inversely with the fourth
power of this quantity. Radio telescopes must compensate for scintillation at high values of this quantity,
and Planck's constant divided by momentum yields one of these quantities named for de Broglie [d-
BROY]. In the double-slit experiment, differences of integer multiples of this quantity produced
constructive interference. Symbolized by the Greek letter lambda and equal to velocity divided by
frequency, the colors of visible light correspond to values between 400 and 700 nanometers. Name this
quantity often measured as the distance between two consecutive crests.
ANSWER: wavelength [prompt on lambda before it is mentioned]
The change in this quantity is related to one minus the cosine of the angle of incidence by the equation
describing Compton scattering. According to the Rydberg (RIDE-berg) formula, the inverse of this quantity
is equal to the difference in the squares of the reciprocals (RE-sip-ro-culls) of the energy levels. This
quantity is equal to Planck's (Planks) constant over momentum in the de Broglie (De broly) equation. This
quantity is equal to velocity over frequency. For 10 points, name this quantity that is equal to the distance
between a wave's crests and often represented by the letter lambda.
ANSWER: wavelength [or lambda before mention]
An integer multiplied by this quantity is equal to two times the lattice spacing times the sine of the angle
of incidence according to Bragg's law. This quantity for a photon can be found by dividing Planck's
constant by linear momentum. That relationship was first put forth by de Broglie, who names the form of
this quantity for matter. This quantity is equal to speed divided by frequency or speed times the period. For
10 points, name this distance between identical points on a wave.
ANSWER: wavelength
This quantity is multiplied by an integer value in Bragg's law. According to de Broglie, this quantity is
equal to Planck's constant divided by momentum. The inverse of this quantity is known as the
wavenumber. A change in this property for light is called a red shift. Additionally, dividing the speed of
light by this quantity, denoted lambda, gives the frequency of light. For 10 points, name this property of a
wave which for visible light ranges from about 400 to 700 nanometers.
ANSWER: wavelength
The two types of this interaction are called "vertices" and referred to as either charged or neutral
current. The Cronin-Fitch experiment concerned a process mediated by this force. This parityviolating interaction has very massive gauge bosons. This is the only mechanism by which quark (*)
flavor can change. Sheldon, Salam, and Weinberg won the 1979 Nobel Prize for predicting its unification
with electromagnetism. This force is transmitted by the exchange of W and Z bosons. For 10 points, name
this force governing radioactive decays.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force
Feynman and Gell-Man proposed a "vector minus axial vector" Lagrangian for this interaction to
compensate for a consequence of the CKM matrix. Rubbia and van der Meer won the 1984 Nobel Prize in
Physics for their work in discovering the particles which mediate this force, and Glashow, Salam, and
Weinberg posited its unification with the electromagnetic force. This force is mediated by the W and Z
bosons and is capable of changing the flavor of quarks. For 10 points, name this force which is not as
strong as the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force [or weak interaction]
The long range asymmetry of this interaction was measured by the E158 experiment, while the CKM
matrix parametrizes this interaction with the Cabibbo angle. Experiments with Kaon physics by
Madame Wu show that this interaction violation P and CP symmetry. This force, which can change
flavor and cause beta decay, has a very limited range because it is mediated by massive (*) W and Z
bosons. For 10 points, what force did Weinberg, Salam, and Glashow unify with electromagnetism, named
for its low strength in comparison to the strong force?
ANSWER: Weak Nuclear Force or Interaction
The ratio of the masses of the carriers of this force is the cosine of the Weinberg angle. This is the
only force that changes quark flavors, and this force can also violate CP symmetry. Glashow,
Weinberg, and Salaam showed that above one hundred giga electron volts, this force unifies with the
(*) electromagnetic force. This force is mediated by W and Z bosons and is responsible for beta decay. For
10 points name this fundamental force, much less powerful than the strong force.
ANSWER: weak force
This interaction's symmetry group is SU(2) cross U(1). The Cabbibo angle describes the strength of this
interaction in quarks. Madame Wu showed that parity violation depends upon this interaction's effects on
pions. This force is mediated by W and Z bosons and causes avor-changing in quarks. An experiment
conducted by Salam, Weinberg, and Glashow (*) united this force with the electromagnetic force. This
force is responsible for radioactive decay. For ten points, name this fundamental forces that is dwarfed in
comparison to the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force (or weak interaction)
The discovery that this force violated parity solved the tau-theta puzzle. The interaction of two protons
via this force initiates the nuclear fusion reaction that takes place in the sun. Salam, Glashow and Weinberg
unified this force with electromagnetism. Neutrinos only interact via this force. The gauge bosons of this
force are the W and Z particles. For 10 points, name this fundamental force that governs beta decay, a
nuclear force several orders of magnitude less strong than the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force [or weak interaction]
The CKM matrix explains several reactions mediated by this interaction, which Cronin and Fitch
showed violates CP symmetry and which Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg showed emerged from the
breaking of an SU(2) x U(1) gauge symmetry. Madame Wu's experiment that demonstrated parity
violation relied on a (*) pion decay mediated by this force, and this force governs the conversion of an up
quark into a superposition of down quarks. For 10 points, name this force essential to nuclear decays,
mediated by the W and Z bosons, which has much less influence over subatomic particles than the one
mediated by gluons, the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force [or weak interaction]
The coupling constant of this interaction is proportional to a factor denoted as quantity one minus gammafive, and that factor accounts for the axial vector present in this interaction. In the ultrarelativistic limit, the
underlying symmetry group of this interaction is given by SU(2) cross U(1), and the the mixing of quark
generations by this interaction is encoded in a 3 by 3 matrix named for Kobayashi and Maskawa. Lee and
Yang explained the results of C.S. Wu's beta-decay experiment by proposing that parity conservation was
violated by this interaction. Unified with electromagnetism by Glashow, Weinberg, and Salaam, for ten
points, identify this fundamental interaction mediated by the W and Z bosons.
ANSWER: weak force or interaction
This interaction was proposed to result in a asymmetric release of certain radiation from cobalt-60
by Lee and Yang, or, in other words, to violate parity symmetry. Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg
unified this force with the electromagnetic force. The (*) W and Z bosons mediate this force, which
allows quarks to change flavor. For 10 points, name this fundamental interaction which mediates beta
decay, and is contrasted with a more powerful nuclear force.
ANSWER: weak interaction [or weak nuclear force]
This interaction is described by an extension of the GIM mechanism, the CKM matrix, and an
experiment by Chien-Shiung Wu showed that this interaction violates parity. It is mediated by heavy W and
Z bosons and is capable of changing flavor, and one property of this interaction was posited by Glashow,
Salam, and Weinberg. That property is this force's interaction with the electromagnetic force. For 10 points,
name this physical force that is not as powerful as the strong force.
ANSWER: weak force [or weak interaction]
The CKM matrix explains decays due to this type of interaction and has been important in understanding
why CP violation can occur for it. This is the only type of interaction capable of changing flavor, and it
typically occurs much slower than its counterparts in the Standard Model. Successful unification theories
have been able to pair this force with the electromagnetic, and this force can only be mediated by massive
gauge bosons such as the W and Z bosons. For 10 points, name this fundamental force that leads to beta
decay and is about 10 to the 14th times less intense than the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force or interaction
Richard Feynman and Murray Gell-Mann proposed the V-A theory of this interaction. The charge current
type of this interaction was discovered before its neutral current type. This fundamental interaction is
responsible for changing the flavor of quarks, which can cause beta decay. CP symmetry is violated by this
force, which is mediated by the W and Z bosons. Glashow, Salam and Weinberg unified it with the
electromagnetic force. For 10 points, name this fundamental force between elementary particles that is not
as powerful as the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force [or weak nuclear interaction; prompt on "electroweak"]
This interaction can be described in terms of a single parameter, the Cabibbo (kuh-BEE-bo)
angle. Both leptons and neutrinos experience this interaction, which governs flavor changes. This
interaction, which is mediated by the W and Z bosons, is responsible for the conversion of a neutron
to a proton in beta decay. Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg unified this fundamental force with the (*)
electromagnetic force. This force has a range of only about ten to the negative eighteenth meters. For 10
points, name this force that is less strong than the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force
Harnik et al. argue against the anthropic principle by proposing a universe that lacks this. One
instance of this interaction is modeled with a unitary matrix that includes three mixing angles and a
complex phase that models CP violation. A vector minus axial Lagrangian for this force leads to
maximal parity violation, making this force only affect left-handed particles. This force is responsible for
quark flavor changing, was unified with electromagnetism by Glashow, Weinberg, and Salaam, and is
transmitted by the massive W and Z bosons. For 10 points, name this fundamental force involved in
radioactive decays.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force [or weak interaction]
This interaction has both vector and axial vector components, which behave oppositely under
improper Lorentz transformations. By measuring the disparity in distribution between gamma ray
and electron emissions in the decay of cobalt-60 to nickel-60, Chien-Shiung Wu experimentally
showed that this interaction violates parity conservation. The mass of this interaction's gauge bosons
is provided by the Higgs boson upon the symmetry breaking of this interaction's unification with (*)
electromagnetism. The W and Z bosons are the force carriers for this interaction, which mediates beta
decay. For 10 points, name this fundamental force that occurs at almost the same length scale as - but
whose coupling constant is much smaller than - the strong force.
ANSWER: weak force
The E-158 experiment at Stanford investigated this interaction's role in Moller scattering. A simple way to
visualize the elements of one mathematical structure used in this interaction is the unitarity triangle. That
structure is the subject of a parametrization of Wolfenstein. The Lagrangian of this interaction is a vector
minus axial vector. The decay of neutral kaons was used by Cronin and Fitch to show that this interaction
violates CP symmetry. That previous structure is the CKM matrix, which describes the probability of quark
flavor transitions. Salam, Sheldon, and Weinberg won a Nobel for unifying the electromagnetic force with
this force, which mediates beta decay. This force is mediated by the W and Z bosons. For 10 points, name
this fundamental force that is, curiously, stronger than gravity.
ANSWER: weak force [or weak interaction; prompt on flavor-changing neutral currents]
A 2005 study at the SLAC showed the lessening strength of this entity at longer distances. Val Fitch and
James Cronin received the Nobel Prize using kaon decay to demonstrate its property of CP violation, and an
early theory of it was attempted by Fermi, whose name is sometimes given to its coupling constant. Yang
and Lee built upon the experiments of C.S. Wu to show that it violates parity, and the Glashow-WeinbergSalaam theory unifies it with the electromagnetic force. Mediated by the heavy W and Z gauge bosons, it is
capable of changing flavour, and affects all quarks and left-handed leptons. Causing the production of a
proton, electron, and anti-neutrino in beta-minus decay, this is, FTP, which fundamental interaction, ten to
the fourteenth power less in strength than the strong force?
ANSWER: weak force
Its strength is proportional to the sine squared of a mixing angle, and it violates CPT symmetry. Carlo
Rubbia and Simon van der Meer won the 1984 Nobel Prize in Physics for helping discover the particles that
carry this force, the W and Z bosons. It is responsible for beta decay, and Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg
unified it with the electromagnetic force. For 10 points, name this fundamental force, which is not as strong
as the strong force.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force
One theory of this force states that the square of its coupling constant times the square root of 2 over
8 is proportional to G sub F. The constraint V sub ik times V-star of jk, summed over all k, equals
zero, gives the unitarity triangles that constrain a mathematical device used to describe this force.
The particles that mediate this force were discovered using stochastic cooling in the UA1 and UA2
collaborations, which collided protons and antiprotons together; that experiment won (*) Rubbia and
van Der Meer the Nobel Prize. The aforementioned matrix contains a CP-violating phase and is named for
Cabibo, Kobayashi, and Masakawa. Glashow, Weinberg, and Salaam unified it with electromagnetism, and
this force mediates beta decay. For 10 points, name this force that is mediated by the W and Z particles.
ANSWER: weak force
In quarks, the strength of this interaction is governed by the Cabibbo angle. One mechanism governed
by this interaction can couple to any non-gluon particle; that neutral current interaction provides the
mechanism for scattering of neutrinos by ordinary matter. This interaction can change the flavor of quarks in other words, it is responsible for the conversion of quarks into other types of quarks, which is seen in
beta decay. This force is mediated by the W and Z bosons. For 10 points, name this fundamental force that
at high energies merges with the electromagnetic force.
ANSWER: the weak force [or weak interaction; prompt on electroweak]
The particles that carry it comprise the positively and negatively charged W particles and the neutral Z
particle. For example, under it, any quark type can convert to any other quark type with a different electric
charge by emitting or absorbing a W boson. The sun would not burn without it since it allows deuterium
fusion to take place, and it is best known for causing the radioactive beta decay of particles. FTP, name this
fundamental force that is stronger than gravitation but not the electromagnetic force or the strong nuclear
force.
ANSWER: Weak Nuclear Force or Weak interaction
The universality of this mechanism is preserved using an angle formulated by Cabibbo who along
with Maskawa and Kobayashi names a matrix that describes the free propagation of certain
quantum states to model this. It is responsible for the appearance of naked top quarks in
experiments because other decay modes are suppressed and it also causes the beat (*) decay of
Carbon-14 to Nitrogen-14. This force's range is hypothesized to be due to symmetry breaking at high energy
and is limited to less than the diameter of the nucleus because it is mediated by massive gauge bosons, the
W and the Z. Thought to have once been unified with the electromagnetic force, FTP, name this
fundamental force that is named for its low strength compared to the EM and strong forces.
ANSWER: weak nuclear force (or weak nuclear interaction, accept electroweak)
Archimedes identified this quantity as the opposite of buoyancy, and Aristotle reasoned that the
speed of a falling object was proportional to this quantity. Newton related inertia to this quantity; its
unit is named for him. The value of this quantity for an object on the (*) moon is about one sixth of its
value for the same object on earth. For 10 points, name this quantity that is the force exerted on an object by
gravity.
ANSWER: weight (accept force of gravity before the end; prompt on force; do not accept "mass")
One early invention by this man used wires to transmit sounds to a device suspended from the
ceiling and was called the acoucryptophone or enchanted lyre. This man's portable harmonium
earned him a prize at the 1851 Great Exhibition. Lord Playfair popularized the digraph substitution
cipher invented by this man. John Frederic Darnell and Marc Isambard Brunel settled a dispute
between this man and his one-time partner William (*) Cooke over a telegraph system the two invented.
A device named for him was invented by Hunter Christie and consists of a battery, a galvanometer and four
resistors. For 10 points, identify this British physicist who names a device that can be used to compare
currents to compute resistance, his namesake bridge.
ANSWER: Sir Charles Wheatstone
HL Tau 76 was the first variable type of this object discovered. If the mass of its progenitor cannot utilize
the triple-alpha process, the helium type of this can form, though none have yet been formed this way.
Arthur Eddington predicted that the light from these were subject to redshift because of their enormous
density. When one of these forms in a binary star system, accretion of matter onto them from their
companion star may result in a Type 1a supernova. As these objects are solely supported by electron
degeneracy pressure, they will collapse if they exceed the Chandrasekhar Limit. Name this type of stellar
remnant that the sun will eventually form.
ANSWER: white dwarf [prompt on "star" or "dwarf star"]
Mestel's model for the cooling of these objects assumes that the ions in the core are an ideal gas. Types of
these objects include Sirius B and Procyon B, both of which lie in the left and middle of the lower part of
the HR Diagram. According to one equation, these objects become smaller as their mass increases since
they are held together by electron degeneracy pressure. That equation relates how they should have a
diameter of 0 at 1.44 solar masses. After its phase as a red giant, the Sun will become one of these stars,
since its mass does not exceed the Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, name these relatively small and lowluminosity stars whose name indicates their pale color.
ANSWER: white dwarf or white dwarves [prompt on just dwarf, on the first sentence prompt on stars, but after it, DO NOT PROMPT or ACCEPT IT]
Hoyle discovered that one theory about these objects does not apply in non-uniformly rotating
examples. Eddington predicted the first observed gravitational redshift from an object of this kind,
initially as a way to discredit Opik's measurement of its density. These stars are supported by Fermi
pressure. Found in the lower left of a standard Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, these stars are generally
bounded in mass by a quantity equal to about 1.44 solar masses and known as the Chandrasekhar limit. For
10 points, name this class of stars, the endpoint for intermediate-mass main sequence stars, that are
phenomenologically small stars that giving off incoherent light
ANSWER: white dwarfs [prompt on population VII ]
In the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, an instability strip characterized by GW Vir stars contains stars which
later evolve into this class of stars. Variable-luminosity stars of this type include DBV and DAV, or ZZ
Ceti, stars. These stars which are composed of electron-degenerate matter occupy a strip across the bottomleft of the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, and one of these stars may collapse into a neutron star if it exceeds
1.4 solar masses, known as the Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, name this class of dwarf stars.
ANSWER: White Dwarf [prompt on Dwarf]
One type of these objects, abbreviated "C/O", propagates a density wave and a Rayleigh-Taylor unstable
fireball after accreting matter from a mass-transferring secondary star. These objects undergo carbon
detonation and have DB, DA and carbon-oxygen varieties. The electron degeneracy pressure will fail to
prevent the gravitational collapse of one of these objects after it exceeds about 1.44 solar masses, the
Chandrasekhar limit. The closest example of one of these is Sirius B, and these stars, formed from the cores
of red giants, cannot undergo nuclear fusion. For 10 points, name these dense stellar remnants contrasted
with similarly small "brown" and "red" stars.
ANSWER: white dwarf [do not accept "dwarf star"]
Internal gravity waves cause luminosity shifts in the "pulsating" type of this star. These stars are the
"primaries" in a cataclysmic variable system and are supported by electron degeneracy pressure. Most
main sequence stars become these at the end of their life-cycle, and their upper mass limit of around
1.44 solar masses is given by the Chandrasekhar Limit. For 10 points, name this type of star found in the
lower left of the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram that are small and emit light made up of all colors.
ANSWER: white dwarfs [prompt on dwarfs]
These objects can emit surface helium flash as they accrete matter from binary companions. Their upper
mass limit, about 1.44 solar masses, is named for the Indian physicist Chandrasekhar; above it, electron
degeneracy pressure fails and they collapse into neutron stars. Largely incapable of undergoing fusion, this
is, for 10 points, what type of faintly luminous, small stellar remnant, not to be confused with "red" and
"brown" stars of the same size?
ANSWER: white dwarf
DAV stars are examples of the pulsating variety of these. Cataclysmic variable stars usually
involve a donor star and one of these. These stars are located in the lower left of the
Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. The density limit of these stars are described the Pauli exclusion
principle. They are sustained by electron degeneracy pressure. Above 1.44 solar masses, known as
the (*) Chandrasekhar (chan-DREH-suh-kahr) limit, they may explode in a Type 1a supernova. For 10
points, name these small stars of low luminosity.
ANSWER: white dwarf
One of these objects was first investigated by Bessel, who noted that although it had a similar mass to
our sun, it was noticeably dimmer. These objects frequently show only hydrogen in spectroscopies,
due to heavier elements "sinking" farther into the object. One example of these objects, (*) Sirius B,
was calculated to have a density of approximately one hundred and twenty five kilograms per cubic
centimeter. Located on the bottom left corner of a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, they cause type Ia
supernovae when they exceed 1.44 solar masses, known as the Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, name
this stellar object formed at the end of a typical massive main-sequence star's life, a small, hot star.
ANSWER: white dwarf [prompt on dwarf]
Goldreich and Wu expanded on Brickhill's suggestion that convective driving would explain g-mode
excitation in DAV or ZZ Ceti examples of these objects. Harrison, Wakano, and Wheeler demonstrated the
instability that arises due to inverse beta decay when the mass is large. They can have oxygen-neonmagnesium cores, but more often have cores of carbon-oxygen or helium. Early research on them included
Walter Adams- examination of 40 Eridani B and Sirius B, which are classical examples of these stars that
exist due to electron degeneracy pressure. For 10 points, name these stars subject to the Chandrasekhar
limit.
ANSWER: White Dwarf Stars
This type of star can violently explode in a namesake type of supernova, sometimes called Type Ia (one
"a"). The formation of this type of star results in it being surrounded by a planetary nebula. Supported by
electron degeneracy pressure, this type of star cannot exceed a mass of 1.4 solar masses, called the
Chandrasekhar limit, since excessively massive stars collapse into neutron stars or black holes instead. For
10 points, name this hottest type of dwarf star.
ANSWER: white dwarf
In late stages, these objects are believed to begin crystallizing, and Metcalfe and Kanan posited that
one of these called BPM37093 was 90% crystal. The equation of state for these objects, when taking
relativity into account, interpolates between P proportional to density to the four-thirds for large
density and to the five-thirds for small density. HL Tau was the first variable one of these discovered,
and RAMBOs either consist of these bodies or Brown Dwarves. The surface of an accreting one can
undergo a runaway form of fusion called a helium flash. Ralph Fowler posited that if these objects exist as a
Fermi gas, that the Pauli exclusion principle would keep them from collapsing on themselves; that result
was used to show that they have masses less than 1.4 solar masses. For 10 points, name these objects
subject to the Chandrashekar limit, a massive type of star.
ANSWER: White dwarf
The first one of these to be discovered was found in a triple star system. Sirius's companion, Sirius B, was
the next to be identified. Known to sometimes explode in Type Ia supernovas by carbon detonation, these
stars are believed to be the "corpses" of low mass stars which expand to red giants and undergo the triplealpha process. The "black" variation of this star has been proposed but the idea has since been discarded
because even one of these formed at the beginning of the universe would still radiate at temperatures of
several thousand Kelvins. FTP, name this dense class of stars composed of electron-degenerate matter with
a comparable mass of the Sun and the volume of the Earth.
ANSWER: white dwarf
Sion and Greenstein developed a classification system for these objects based on the presence of He I,
He II, and metal lines. Kanaan and Metcalfe determined that, in line with theoretical arguments, one
of these objects had heavily crystallized as it cooled. If these objects can strip mass from a
companion, they can undergo carbon detonation followed by a (*) type Ia supernova. Stars that have
insufficient mass to form a red giant will shed their outer layers to form one of these objects. They are
supported entirely by electron degeneracy pressure and therefore have to be smaller than 1.44 solar masses.
For 10 points, name these dense stars that have mass less than the Chandrasekhar Limit.
ANSWER: White Dwarf
In 1867, astronomers using the 40 cm Foucault telescope at the Paris Observatory discovered three stars in
the constellation Cygnus that displayed broad emission bands on an otherwise continuous spectrum. By
1929, the width of the emission bands was being attributed to the Doppler effect, and hence it was obvious
the gas surrounding these stars must be moving with velocities of 300-2400 km/s along the line of sight,
and thus were examples of these. For 10 points name this class of massive stars, named for their
discoverers, that lose up to 10 to the negative five solar masses a year in high-velocity stellar winds.
ANSWER: Wolf-Rayet stars
In a Carnot engine, entering heat times one minus the ratio of the temperatures of the resevoirs is equal to
this quantity. It's not a change in volume, but an isochoric process has a value of zero for this quantity. A
measure of the reversible amount of this quantity at constant temperature and volume is the Helmholtz free
energy. Taking an integral on a PV diagram gives this quantity. In thermodynamics, change in internal
energy is equal to heat added plus this quantity. Identify this concept for which the SI unit is Joules and can
be calculated by multiplying force and distance.
ANSWER: work
The principle of least action can be rewritten as the principle of the virtual form of this quantity.
The magnetic force on a charged particle cannot contributes 0 of this quantity because velocity is
crossed with the magnetic field. It is equal to the line integral of a particle's path through a vector
field. The change in this quantity divided by the time elapsed gives (*) power. This quantity is equal to
the change in kinetic energy. For 10 points, identify this quantity equal to force times distance and
measured in joules.
ANSWER: work
This quantity can be calculated by integrating a phase curve. Its angular counterpart is defined by the
product of the applied torque and the total angular displacement, and in thermodynamics, the differential of
this quantity is defined as the product of pressure and the differential of volume. A theorem named for this
quantity relates it to the change in kinetic energy of a particle. Power is equal to this quantity over time. For
10 points, name this scalar quantity measured in Joules that is, simply put, the product of force and distance.
ANSWER: Work
For some reversible, infinite-step processes, this quantity equals the natural log of the volume ratio times
the number of moles, the ideal gas constant, and temperature. This physical quantity accounts for the
difference between the molar heat capacity of an ideal gas at constant pressure and the molar heat
capacity at constant volume, the latter of which is equal to 3/2 times the ideal gas constant. The change
in the internal energy of a system is equal to heat plus this quantity, and for a compressed gas, this
quantity equals pressure times the change in volume. For 10 points, name this quantity which represents
energy transfer done by acting against a force for a given distance.
ANSWER: thermodynamic work
Helmholtz Free Energy gives the thermodynamical potential in terms of the useful form of this. The path
dependence of this quantity is shown in the first law of thermodynamics which states that this is equal to
the integral of the pressure times the volume. Per one theorem it is equal to the change in kinetic energy,
and it its measured in joules. For 10 points, name this quantity, which is equivalent to force times distance.
ANSWER: work
This quantity can be measured by length on a Mollier diagram. One device for producing this quantity is
subdivided into "alpha" and "beta" types, which use different numbers of cylinders. Another design that
produces this quantity is the Otto cycle, whose steps involve isochoric and adiabatic processes, which is a
more practical realization of the Carnot cycle. This quantity is equal to the integral of a curve on a P-V
diagram, and this quantity can be produced from temperature differences by steam or internal combustion
engines. For ten points, name this quantity that is often computed as force times distance.
ANSWER: work
When moving charges in a uniform electric field, this quantity is equal to the product of the distance moved
with the size of the charge and magnitude of the field, while the voltage between two points can be defined
as this quantity over charge. This quantity arises from the integral of the inexact differential F ds, and is
measured in units of joules. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to force times the distance over which it
is exerted.
ANSWER: work
This quantity due to surface friction on a wheel is zero when the wheel is rolling without slipping because
the friction is static. In a conservative field, this quantity taken around a closed path is zero. Dividing this
quantity over the time gives the power. For a constant force, this value is equal to the dot product of the
force and displacement vectors. For 10 points, name this quantity that can be measured in joules, the
amount of energy transferred by a force to an object.
ANSWER: work [prompt on change in energy or equivalents]
For a quasistatic process in which there is a volume change, this quantity is obtained by integrating the
pressure from the initial to the final volume with respect to volume. For a charge moving in an electric field,
this quantity is given by the line integral between two points of the gradient of potential. This quantity is
uniformly zero for the magnetic field because the Lorentz force is always orthogonal to the direction of
motion. For any thermodynamic system, the heat absorbed is given by the energy change plus this quantity.
Given in general by the dot product of the force and displacement vectors, for 10 points, identify this
quantity which in the context of mechanics measures the amount of energy applied to a body over some
distance by a force.
ANSWER: work [prompt on any answer that includes "energy"]
D-Alembert's principle generalizes the principle of this quantity's virtual form to dynamics. In a
reversible process at constant temperature, this quantity equals the change of the Helmholtz free
energy. Unless the force field is the gradient of a scalar field so the force is (*) conservative, it is path
dependent. It is the namesake of the minimum energy of photons required for the photoelectric effect. This
quantity is given by the integral of PdV, and equals the difference between heat and change of internal
energy by the 1st law of thermodynamics. In mechanics, it equals the change in kinetic energy. For 10
points, name this quantity given by the integral of F-dot-dx.
ANSWER: work [or work function]
For an ideal gas, this quantity can be found by taking the integral of pressure with respect to
volume. For a point charge in an electric field, this quantity is equal to the point charge's charge
multiplied by the change in voltage. In general, this quantity is found by taking the line integral of
force or the dot product of force and displacement, and it is also equal to the change in (*) kinetic or
potential energy. For 10 points, identify this quantity that is only non-zero when a force acts on an object in
the direction of motion.
ANSWER: work
For charges in a dielectric, this quantity equals one-half the integral of the dot product of the displacement
and electric fields. The amount of this quantity due to the expansion of a gas is equal to the integral of
pressure with respect to volume. For a moving electric charge, this quantity is equal to the charge times the
change in electric potential. According to a theorem named for this quantity and "energy," this quantity for
a process is equal to the change in kinetic energy. It is given for a constant force by force times
displacement. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of energy transferred by a force acting on a
body.
ANSWER: work
The value of this quantity for the change in volume of a gas is equivalent to the area under the curve on a PV diagram, so at constant pressure this quantity equals "pressure times change in volume." The first law of
thermodynamics sets change in internal energy equal to "heat added plus [this quantity]." Dividing this
quantity by time yields power, and an important result of classical mechanics says that this quantity is equal
to energy transferred. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in Joules and equal to force times
distance.
ANSWER: work
It's not change in volume, but this quantity is zero for an isochoric process because there is no area under its
P-V curve, while in an isobaric process, this measurement is equal to P times delta V. For an object in
circular motion, this quantity is also zero, because the line integral of the tangential component of the
centripetal force along its path is zero. Because this quantity is equal to change in kinetic energy, it has units
of joules, and it is path-independent for conservative forces. Equal to the dot product of force and
displacement, for 10 points, name this scalar quantity calculated by multiplying force and distance,
symbolized W.
ANSWER: work
On a phase diagram, it can be determined by finding the area under the curve. The amount of it done on a
system can be found by subtracting the amount of heat added from the internal energy of the system.
Sometimes measured in ergs, it can be found by multiplying the pressure and volume change in a system.
Like torque, it can be expressed in the units Newton-meters, and the rate at which it happens is known as
power. For 10 points, name this physical quantity, the amount of energy needed by a force to move an
object a distance.
ANSWER: work
For an isobaric process, this quantity equals the product of pressure and the volume change. For a
constant torque, this quantity is the product of torque and angular displacement. Power is this
quantity's rate of change. The dot product of (*) force and displacement equals this quantity. For 10
points, name this physical quantity that equals the energy transferred by a force applied over a distance,
measured in joules.
ANSWER: work
In a reversible compression, this quantity equals RT times the log of the ratio of volumes. This
quantity equals the negative integral of pressure with respect to volume, and the First Law of
Thermodynamics relates the change in internal energy to (*) heat and this quantity. This quantity is
equivalent to the change of kinetic energy in a system, and like energy, is measured in joules. For 10 points,
name this quantity equal to the dot product of force and displacement.
ANSWER: work
Although it is not enthalpy, in an adiabatic process, this quantity equals the heat capacity at constant
volume times the initial temperature minus the final temperature. For an isothermal process, it equals
number of moles times RT times the log of the ratio of the volumes. Carnot efficiency equals this quantity
divided by the heat of the hotter reservoir. When applied with a torque, it is called "shaft." This quantity is
given by the area inside a cycle on a PV diagram, so its differential equals pressure times the differential of
volume. The change in internal energy equals heat minus it, which is positive when done by a system on its
surroundings. For 10 points, name this quantity that is the amount of useful mechanical energy derived
from a thermodynamic system.
ANSWER: thermodynamic work
These entities- name was first coined by American theoretical physicist John Archibald Wheeler, though
German mathematician Hermann Weyl had already proposed a theory about them, in connection with his
mass analysis of electromagnetic field energy. One variety of these, also known as Einstein-Rosen Bridges,
can be modeled as vacuum solutions to the Einstein field equations, combining a black hole and a white
hole, but are so unstable that they vanish even before light can pass through. Those are named for
Schwarzchild, and Kip Thorne and Mike Morris published the first report on traversable varieties of these
structures. For 10 points, name these entities, generally thought of as shortcuts in space-time.
ANSWER: wormhole
Henry Moseley's plot modeling the square roots of frequencies of characteristic ones of these was used to
calculate elements- atomic numbers. A law modeled by the equation two d sine theta equals n lambda
models the diffraction of these entities; this relation is known as Bragg's Law. Max von Laue discovered
that crystals could diffract this type of radiation, and the scattering of light by either gamma rays or these
entities is known as the Compton Effect. Having frequencies between those of gamma rays and ultraviolet
radiation, name this type of electromagnetic radiation discovered by Wilhelm Roentgen and often used for
medical imaging purposes.
ANSWER: x-rays
Nikola Tesla produced this phenomenon experimentally in the form of bremsstrahlung
(BREM-struh-lung). This phenomenon was discovered using a Crookes tube and a screen coated with
barium platinocyanide (plah-tih-noh-SIE-yih-nide). Max von Laue won a Nobel Prize for studying the
diffraction of this phenomenon. It was first systematically studied by Wilhelm Roentgen (RUNT-gen),
though Ivan Pulyui (pool-YOO-ee) was one of the first to apply it to medicine. For 10 points, name this
high-energy electromagnetic radiation used to take images of teeth and bones.
ANSWER: X-rays [prompt on electromagnetic radiation or radiation before mention; prompt o Roentgen radiation before Roentgen is mentioned]
One process that emits this radiation involves decelerating charged particles in an electric field and is called
Bremsstrahlung. The production of a discrete spectrum of these rays requires removing an inner-shell
electron from metal atoms; that process is this radiation's namesake fluorescence. Diffraction of these rays is
used in this radiation's namesake crystallography, famously used by Rosalind Franklin to enable the
deduction of the structure of DNA. Also called Rontgen rays for their discoverer, and with a shorter
wavelength than ultraviolet radiation, for 10 points, name this band of high-energy electromagnetic
radiation often used in medical diagnostics.
ANSWER: X-rays [accept Rontgen rays before it is read, accept "radiation" for "rays" in either one]
A technique using this type of light uses truncation rods to describe atomic surfaces in interfacial systems.
The spectrum generated by absorption spectroscopy with light in this portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum is split into K-edge, L-edge, and M-edge forms depending on the principal quantum number of the
electron excited. This type of light is used to determine lattice parameters in the Debye-Scherrer powder
method, and this type of light is used in the transmission and back versions of the Laue method. A law
giving the angles at which photons scatter coherently is named for Bragg and used in technique using this
portion of the spectrum, which was also used by Rosalind Franklin to produce images of DNA. For 10
points, name this type of light with wavelength between that of gamma rays and ultraviolet light.
ANSWER: X-ray radiation [accept equivalents to radiation, accept gamma radiation on second clue]
Max von Laue won the 1912 Physics Nobel Prize for his discovery of the diffraction of this kind of
electromagnetic radiation. John Kendrew and Max Perutz studied the three-dimensional structure of
proteins using the "crystallography" of this kind of radiation. It has a wavelength slightly longer than that of
gamma rays. For 10 points, name this kind of radiation used in CT scans and other medical imaging
techniques, such as those used to image the chest.
ANSWER: X rays [or X radiation; or Roentgen radiation]
An alternative pathway to emission of this kind of radiation is the Auger Effect, which uses the
same nomenclature. It can be divided into "hard" and "soft" types, and like a lower-energy kind of
radiation, undergoes Compton scattering. This section of the electromagnetic spectrum has a shorter
wavelength than (*) ultraviolet light, and lower energy than gamma rays. For 10 points, name this kind of
radiation discovered by Wilhelm Roentgen, which is often used in medical imaging.
ANSWER: X-rays [or X-radiation; or Roentgen rays before "Roentgen"]
The corona of the sun produces mostly this type of radiation, and it comes in "hard" and "soft" varieties.
Inner shell electrons are expelled from atoms to produce characteristic wavelengths in its namesake
fluorescence, and like gamma rays, radiation of this type undergoes Compton scattering. Formerly known as
(*) Roentgen rays, their namesake crystallography enabled Rosalind Franklin to produce the first image of
the DNA double helix. For ten points, name this type of electromagnetic radiation with frequency between
ultraviolet and gamma rays, often used to image broken bones.
ANSWER: X-rays (accept Roentgen rays before mention)
The maximum energy of these things created by a given voltage is given by the Duane-Hunt law.
Like electrons, they were discovered using a Crookes tube. Riccardo Giacconi won his Nobel Prize
for figuring out how these could be used in astronomy, and Max von Laue won his Nobel Prize for
work on the diffraction of these things. These things were used by Rosalind Franklin to make an
image of DNA molecules, and these are measured by the Chandra Observatory. This electromagnetic
radiation is more energetic than ultraviolet light but less energetic than gamma rays. Name this
radiation discovered by Wilhelm Rontgen, used to observe bones.
ANSWER: X-rays [prompt on photons or electromagnetic radiation or EM radiation]
The Chandra space telescope observes this type of radiation. The angles at which this type of
radiation causes diffraction when it hits a crystal are described by Bragg's law. This type of
radiation has wavelength longer than (*) gamma rays, but shorter than UV rays. When experimenting
with cathode ray tubes, Wilhelm Rontgen discovered this type of radiation. For 10 points, name this type of
electromagnetic radiation that is frequently used for medical imaging.
ANSWER: X rays (accept Rontgen rays before "Rontgen")
Small-angle scattering of this kind of radiation is used to find the conformation and shape of some
proteins. The broad iron K line is this type of radiation, whose emission is governed by the empirical
Moseley's Law. It was originally discovered being emitted from a Crookes tube by William Roentgen
(RENT-ghen), who used them to image his wife's hand. For 10 points, name this type of electromagnetic
radiation with wavelength between ultraviolet and gamma radiation.
ANSWER: X-ray radiation
A diffraction pattern in crystals created by this type of radiation was named for Max von Laue. A
physicist who worked with this type of radiation was responsible for creating an image called "Hand
with Ring" and was Wilhelm (+) Roentgen. A machine using this type of radiation was present at the
Buffalo's World Fair when William (*) McKinley was shot. For 10 points, name this type of radiation
that can be used in hospitals to non-invasively view bones.
ANSWER: X-rays
The Duane-Hunt Law describes the maximum frequency of this type of radiation that can be produced by
the deceleration of electrons in a process known as bremsstrahlung. It is the weaker of the types of radiation
that undergo Compton scattering, and the different forms of this radiation are called hard and soft. While
experimenting with a Crookes tube, (*) William Rontgen discovered this radiation. This type of radiation is
more energetic than UV light but less so than gamma rays. For 10 points, name this type of radiation often
used for its penetrating strength to take medical pictures of bones.
ANSWER: x-rays (or x-radiation; accept Rontgen rays before mention)
The limits of resolution for this technique are given by the limiting sphere which has its origin of
reciprocal space located on the edge of the Ewald sphere with radius 1 over lambda. The breaking of
centrosymmetry to produce Friedel opposites with different magnitudes is exploited in anomalous
dispersion phasing in this technique and it can be modified by the Laue method, which generates a
(*) photograph containing a series dots lying on ellipses. Screws, glides, and Bravais translations generate
zonal and integral extinctions in, for 10 points, what technique that can be used to determine the d-spacing
between atomic planes using Bragg's law and involves passing a certain type of high frequency
electromagnetic radiation through a crystal structure.
ANSWER: X-ray diffraction [or X-ray crystallography; prompt on diffraction]
This property varies with grain size according to the Hall-Petch equation. For an ideal elastic
material, the resilience is equal to the square of this property divided by twice the elastic modulus.
The value of this property may be practically determined by the two-thousandths offset method,
given a real strain test curve; it is ideally the stress at the proportional limit, (*) at which plastic
deformation begins. For 10 points, name the material property that is symbolized sigma-sub-y and that is the
force per unit cross-section at which a material will bend or deform irreversibly.
ANSWER: yield strength [or yield stress; prompt on yield or sigma-sub-y before it's mentioned]
With Helmholtz, this man proposed that human vision was caused by three different types of cone
cells in the retina. With Pierre-Simone Laplace, this man names an equation which relates changes in
pressure to surface tension. This man also names the ratio of stress to strain in a material, a property
that describes the (*) elasticity or compressibility of a material and known as his namesake "modulus".
This man also conducted an experiment which helped describe the wave-like nature of light. For 10 points,
name this English scientist who conducted the double slit experiment.
ANSWER: Thomas Young
One experiment originally performed by this man was re-done by Claus Jonsson using electrons. He is
the namesake of a value, symbolized E, which is calculated as tensile stress of tensile strain. This namesake
of a modulus used in mechanics performed an experiment in which an interference pattern of alternating
bright and dark bands was produced by the namesake setup. For 10 points, identify this physicist who
showed the wave nature of light in his double-slit experiment.
ANSWER: Thomas Young
This scientist developed a formula to describe capillary action which was further developed by PierreSimon Laplace, and he similarly developed an equation to describe the interactions between a liquid and a
solid surface that was later improved upon by Lewis Dupre. By comparing the patterns caused by holding a
narrow card lengthwise up to light and by water in a ripple tank, this scientist argued in favor of the wave
nature of light. Name this scientist who studied the stiffness of elastic materials, which is now measured by
this man's namesake modulus.
ANSWER: Thomas Young
This man, with Hermann von Helmholtz, names a theory which postulates three different types of
photoreceptors with different light sensitivities within the human eye, and a quantity named for this man is
calculated by finding the quotient of tensile stress and tensile strain. This namesake of a "modulus" used in
mechanics conducted an experiment which resulted in the formation of interference fringes after passing
through its namesake setup. For ten points, identify this English scientist who conducted the double slit
experiment.
ANSWER: Thomas Young
One experiment performed by this man was modified by Claus Jonsson with the use of electrons. Along
with a German, he proposed three types of photoreceptor cells as part of the trichromatic theory of color
vision. One quantity named for this man is equal to tensile stress over tensile strain, and is known as his
namesake modulus. This man performed an experiment in 1803 in which monochromatic light passed
through two holes and created an interference pattern of bright and dark fringes. For 10 points, name this
scientist who performed a double slit experiment.
ANSWER: Thomas Young
This scientist's work on surface tension was unified with work done by Pierre-Simon
Laplace [luh-PLAHS] in an equation worked out by Carl Friedrich Gauss. He was a doctor, and
his early work on light led to the discovery of astigmatism and the theory that three types of
photoreceptors are used in sight. His paper "On the nature of light and colours" supported the wave
theory of light by describing what happens when two portions of light from the same original source
are combined. Identify this namesake of the measure of the elasticity of a substance, who found
interference patterns while performing his double-slit experiments.
ANSWER: Thomas Young
This man conducted an experiment that provided the basis for the Pfleegor and Mandel and delayed-choice
experiments. He correctly blamed an irregularly shaped cornea for astigmatism. In an experiment he
undertook, which was confirmed by Fresnel and Arago, he called into question Newton's particle model of
light with his finding of interference fringes. He proposed that light was a transverse wave. For 10 points,
name this English physicist who performed the double-slit experiment, and who names a modulus that
relates stress to strain.
ANSWER: Thomas Young
In the formula for Griffith's criterion, this value is inversely proportional to the energy release rate G.
The area under the curve whose slope is this quantity is the toughness. Elastomers typically have a very low
value for this quantity. This value can be determined for a material by taking multiplying one plus Poisson's
ratio by twice the shear modulus. Below the yield strength, this value is the ratio of stress to strain. For 10
points, name this measure of an object's stiffness, a quantity having units of pressure that is sometimes
named for an English physicist.
ANSWER: Young's modulus [or elastic modulus; or modulus of elasticity]
In beam theory, the bending moment is given by this quantity times the moment of inertia times the
curvature of the beam. The limit to which this quantity can be applied is squared and divided by twice this
quantity to give the resilience. The quantity 1 plus Poisson's ratio times twice the shear modulus gives this
quantity, and it can be used over ranges where the stress is less than the yield strength. According to the
generalized Hooke's law, this tensor quantity is the ratio between the uniaxial stress and uniaxial strain, and
can thus be found from the slope of a stress-strain curve. For 10 points, identify this quantity which has
units of pressure and which describes the stiffness of a material.
ANSWER: Young's modulus
A cantilevered beam bends by an amount inversely proportional to the moment of inertia and this
quantity, while a rod in tension will be stretched an amount inversely proportional to cross-sectional
area and this quantity. It is not constant for materials in the plastic region since (*) Hooke's law
doesn-t hold, and it is the value of the slope on a stress-strain diagram, as it is equal to stress divided by
strain. For 10 points, name this measure of elasticity, named for a British physicist who verified the
wave nature of light with a double slit experiment.
ANSWER: Young's modulus [prompt on modulus of elasticity]
A rank-two tensor in general, this quantity in no longer applicable when dislocation movement becomes
important, a point approximately concomitant with the so-called proportionality limit. It is given for a
homogeneous system as Lame's parameter over Poisson's ratio times the quantity one plus Poisson's ratio
times the quantity one minus twice Poisson's ratio. This quantity has units of pressure and is proportional to
the spring constant for a spring since it gives the ratio of stress to strain. For 10 points, name this object, the
constant of proportionality in Hooke's law, which is usually known for the British polymath who conducted
a notable double slit experiment.
ANSWER: Young's modulus [or modulus of elasticity; or elastic modulus; or tensile modulus]
Two times this quantity times surface energy density over pi gives the square of the crack length in
Griffith's formula. A sudden drop in this quantity with increasing temperature is one way of
measuring the glass transition temperature. One method of calculating this quantity is using the
impulse excitation technique to measure the frequency of the flexure mode. Two times the moment of
inertia times this quantity appears in the denominator of the expression for the deflection angle of a
cantilever. Under the assumption of isotropy, this quantity is equal to quantity one plus the Poisson
(*) ratio end quantity times two times the shear modulus. Under an elastic and linear response, this quantity
represents the proportionality constant in Hooke's law, and this quantity is measured as the slope of a
certain curve before the yield point. For 10 points, name this quantity which is equal to the ratio of the stress
to the strain on a material.
ANSWER: Young's modulus [or tensile modulus; or elastic modulus or modulus of elasticity until "elastic" is read]
For a homogeneous, isotropic material, this quantity is given by three times quantity one minus two times
Poisson's ratio, all over the compressibility. When a certain criterion holds, resilience can be defined as one
over twice this quantity times the square of yield stress. Like pressure, it is measured in Pascals, and
according to the generalized Hooke's law, this quantity is equivalent to the slope of a material's stress-strain
curve. Named for the British physicist whose double-slit experiment showed that light is a wave, for 10
points, name this elastic modulus describing the ratio of stress to strain in a material.
ANSWER: Young's modulus [or modulus of elasticity; prompt on "stiffness"]
When expressing certain other quantities using this quantity and lambda, the first Lame parameter,
the formula square root of quantity nine lambda squared plus two lambda this quantity plus this
quantity squared appears. This quantity is multiplied by the area moment of inertia in the
differential equation that defines Euler-Bernoulli beam theory. The relationship for this quantity is
no longer valid past the proportionality limit. This quantity is equal to the slope of a line on a sigmaepsilon curve. This quantity can be calculated as quantity one plus Poisson's ratio, end quantity times twice
the shear modulus, or as force over area divided by the change in length over initial length. This quantity
measures the stiffness of a material. For 10 points, identify this modulus defined as stress over strain, often
symbolized Y.
ANSWER: Young's Modulus [or tensile modulus; or elastic modulus; or modulus of elasticity; or E; or Y until it is read; do not accept "shear modulus" or "bulk modulus"]
A scalar-valued vector function named for this physicist is best expressed as a Fourier transform
involving integration of the Green's function of the Klein-Gordon equation. That term also gives the
Feynman amplitude in the case where two fermions exchange a particle first theorized by this
physicist. Quarks and leptons couple to the Higgs field in a phenomenon named for this man, which is
much greater for the top quark than any other particle. That phenomenon can be described by a
potential containing an e to the negative k times m times r term, which is also called the (*) screened
Coloumb potential. The first experimental evidence for his theorized class of particles was found by Carl
David Anderson but turned out to be a lepton, the muon. For 10 points, name this physicist who predicted
the existence of mesons, a Japanese Nobel Laureate.
ANSWER: Hideki Yukawa
Experimentally, this particle may be used to calibrate the Tevatron to the detection of hadron jets, since
unlike the other three particles that can decay into hadron jets, it is discernible from the background and has
a precisely known mass. This particle can decay into any fermion and its antiparticle except a top quark,
which is too heavy; it is, however, heavier than an iron atom. Any lepton or quark can emit or absorb one,
unlike its counterparts, whose interactions are governed by the CKM matrix. The interactions that it
mediates never change flavor or any sort of charge. FTP, identify this neutral carrier of the weak nuclear
force, often considered with the W+ and W-.
ANSWER: Z0 boson
Quadratic consequences of this effect can be measured by the Briet-Rabi formula, and in astronomy, it can
be replaced by the Hanle effect. It can be studied with a Fabry-Perot interferometer, and one type of it
occurs when the total spin of the initial or final state is nonzero, which is known as the anomalous version.
Another type of it generates three closely spaced doublets and is known as the Paschen-Back effect. For 10
points, name this effect in which the spectral lines of an atom are split when placed in an external magnetic
field, the analogue of the Stark effect.
ANSWER: Zeeman effect
This effect is given a different name if its magnetic field is strong enough to couple the orbital and
spin angular momentums. Its size can be calculated by assuming two electrons are spinning in
opposite directions in the same plane and finding the change in velocity and therefore energy of
the electrons caused by adding a magnetic field. Because this was discovered before the concept of
electron spin was understood, a common version of it is called anomalous. Name this weaker version
of the Paschen-Back effect in which a magnetic field acting on an atom causes the splitting of spectral
lines.
ANSWER: Zeeman [ZAY-mun] effect
The impact of this effect is calculated using two Lande [lahn-day] g-factors and the Bohr magneton [MAGneh-ton] if the orbital and spin angular momenta are separated. If the two angular momenta are decoupled,
then this effect is no longer relevant, and the changes caused by the magnetic field are called the PaschenBack Effect. In some cases, electron spin is used to explain the presence of more than three lines, which for
historical reasons is called anomalous. This is similar to the Stark effect, which is caused by an electric
field. Name this splitting of spectral lines.
ANSWER: Zeeman Effect (accept Paschen-Back Effect before it is mentioned)
In Mossbauer spectra, the presence of this effect causes a series of six peaks of unequal height to
appear on the velocity versus transmission profile output, and the energy differences observed in
ESR spectroscopy are due to this effect. In this effect, the perturbation is proportional to the Bohr
magneton times the g factor divided by the reduced Planck's constant. The moment of the nucleus
can usually be ignored when calculating this effect, and in systems with a nonzero total spin the anomalous
version of this effect occurs. When the perturbation is strong enough to exceed the LS coupling, the
resulting lines rearrange in the Paschen-Back effect. The magnetic analogue of the Stark effect, for 10
points, name this effect, the splitting of spectral lines by an applied magnetic field.
ANSWER: Zeeman effect
In a strong field, the magnitude of this effect is determined by m l and m s instead of a coupled
quantity m j. The anomalous version of this phenomenon can be explained by noting that the
magnitude of this effect is proportional to the Bohr Magniton and (*) Lande-g factor, which accounts
for both L and S, and led to the discovery of electron spin. A form of this effect occurs in spin-orbit
coupling in atomic fine structure. This phenomenon sees a perturbation Hamiltonian break the degeneracy
of atomic states with different angular momentum. For 10 points, name this effect where an applied
magnetic field causes the splitting of spectral lines, the magnetic analogue of the Stark effect.
ANSWER: Zeeman Effect
Atomic absorption spectroscopy uses this effect to correct background, and in EPR this effect creates a gap
in the energies of a paramagnetic center, which is then matched by a microwave emission. The alpha and pi
lines that this effect produces absorb plane polarized radiation in perpendicular directions and the
anomalous form of this effect prompted Lande and Heisenberg to introduce half integer quantum numbers.
Also used to explain the Lyman-alpha transition in hydrogen, it can be reversed when sufficiently large field
strengths disrupt the coupling between orbital and spin angular momenta in the Paschen-Back effect. For 10
points, name this effect, which occurs due to the splitting of energy levels and associated spectral lines by
an external magnetic field.
ANSWER: Zeeman effect
The type of this effect that occurs when the Lande g-factor is greater than one could not be explained until
electron spin was discovered and is called anomalous. The change in energy that causes this effect varies
directly with the magnetic quantum number, and this effect does not involve a static electric field, unlike the
similar Stark effect. When the angular momentum quantum number is not constant, the Paschen-Back Effect
occurs instead of this effect. Used in Mossbauer spectroscopy and other spectroscopies involving magnetic
spin resonance, name this splitting of spectral lines caused by a magnetic field.
ANSWER: Zeeman (ZAY-mun, but be lenient) effect
The discoverer of this effect observed it by placing an asbestos filament in a flame flanked by coils named
for Ruhmkorff and examining the result in a Rowland grating. This effect is what causes Lyman-alpha
transitions, and its anomalous version occurs when total spin is non-zero. When occurring in a strong field,
it is the result of a non-linear disruption of electron coupling and is known as the Paschen-Back effect,
while its electric analog is the Stark effect. Breaking the degeneracy of electron configurations, for 10
points, identify this splitting of spectral lines in a weak magnetic field, named for a Dutch physicist.
ANSWER: Zeeman effect [or Zeeman splitting]